

=== p1 ===
An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Review . 2023 Jun 1;30(6):573-590. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000002200. The 2023 nonhormone therapy position statement of The North American Menopause Society New Collective Author Collaborators PMID: 37252752 DOI: 10.1097/GME.0000000000002200 Copyright © 2023 by The North American Menopause Society. PubMed Disclaimer full text links Menopause Abstract Objective: To update the evidence-based Nonhormonal Management of Menopause-Associated Vasomotor Symptoms: 2015 Position Statement of The North American Menopause Society. Methods: An advisory panel of clinicians and research experts in women's health were selected to review and evaluate the literature published since the Nonhormonal Management of Menopause- Associated Vasomotor Symptoms: 2015 Position Statement of The North American Menopause Society. Topics were divided into five sections for ease of review: lifestyle; mind-body techniques; prescription therapies; dietary supplements; and acupuncture, other treatments, and technologies. The panel assessed the most current and available literature to determine whether to recommend or not recommend use based on these levels of evidence: Level I, good and consistent scientific evidence; Level II, limited or inconsistent scientific evidence, and Level III, consensus and expert opinion. Results: Evidence-based review of the literature resulted in several nonhormone options for the treatment of vasomotor symptoms. Recommended: Cognitive-behavioral therapy, clinical hypnosis, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors/serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, gabapentin, fezolinetant (Level I); oxybutynin (Levels I-II); weight loss, stellate ganglion block (Levels II-III). Not recommended: Paced respiration (Level I); supplements/herbal remedies (Levels I-II); cooling techniques, avoiding triggers, exercise, yoga, mindfulness-based intervention, relaxation, suvorexant, soy foods and soy extracts, soy metabolite equol, cannabinoids, acupuncture, calibration of neural oscillations (Level II); chiropractic interventions, clonidine; (Levels I-III); dietary modification and pregabalin (Level III). Conclusion: Hormone therapy remains the most effective treatment for vasomotor symptoms and should be considered in menopausal women within 10 years of their final menstrual periods. For women who are not good candidates for hormone therapy because of contraindications (eg, estrogen-dependent cancers or cardiovascular disease) or personal preference, it is important for healthcare professionals to be well informed about nonhormone treatment options for reducing vasomotor symptoms that are supported by the evidence. Related information Cited in Books MedGen LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Ingenta plc

=== p2 ===
Ovid Technologies, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Medical MedlinePlus Health Information