

=== p1 ===
An official website of the United States government Here's how you know . 2020 Sep;27(9):976-992. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001609. The 2020 genitourinary syndrome of menopause position statement of The North American Menopause Society The NAMS 2020 GSM Position Statement Editorial Panel Collaborators PMID: 32852449 DOI: 10.1097/GME.0000000000001609 PubMed Disclaimer full text links Menopause Abstract Objective: To update and expand the 2013 position statement of The North American Menopause Society (NAMS) on the management of the genitourinary syndrome of menopause (GSM), of which symptomatic vulvovaginal atrophy (VVA) is a component. Methods: A Panel of acknowledged experts in the field of genitourinary health reviewed the literature to evaluate new evidence on vaginal hormone therapies as well as on other management options available or in development for GSM. A search of PubMed was conducted identifying medical literature on VVA and GSM published since the 2013 position statement on the role of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments for VVA in postmenopausal women. The Panel revised and added recommendations on the basis of current evidence. The Panel's conclusions and recommendations were reviewed and approved by the NAMS Board of Trustees. Results: Genitourinary syndrome of menopause affects approximately 27% to 84% of postmenopausal women and can significantly impair health, sexual function, and quality of life. Genitourinary syndrome of menopause is likely underdiagnosed and undertreated. In most cases, symptoms can be effectively managed. A number of over-the-counter and government-approved prescription therapies available in the United States and Canada demonstrate effectiveness, depending on the severity of symptoms. These include vaginal lubricants and moisturizers, vaginal estrogens and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), systemic hormone therapy, and the estrogen agonist/antagonist ospemifene. Long-term studies on the endometrial safety of vaginal estrogen, vaginal DHEA, and ospemifene are lacking. There are insufficient placebo-controlled trials of energy- based therapies, including laser, to draw conclusions on efficacy and safety or to make treatment recommendations. Conclusions: Clinicians can resolve many distressing genitourinary symptoms and improve sexual health and the quality of life of postmenopausal women by educating women about, diagnosing, and appropriately managing GSM. Choice of therapy depends on the severity of symptoms, the effectiveness and safety of treatments for the individual patient, and patient preference. Nonhormone therapies available without a prescription provide sufficient relief for most women with mild symptoms. Low-dose vaginal estrogens, vaginal DHEA, systemic estrogen therapy, and ospemifene are effective treatments for moderate to severe GSM. When low-dose vaginal estrogen or DHEA or ospemifene is administered, a progestogen is not indicated; however, endometrial safety has not been studied in clinical trials beyond 1 year. There are insufficient data at present to confirm the safety of vaginal estrogen or DHEA or ospemifene in women with breast cancer; management of GSM should consider the woman's needs and the recommendations of her oncologist. Related information Cited in Books

=== p2 ===
MedGen LinkOut - more resources Full Text Sources Ovid Technologies, Inc. Wolters Kluwer Medical ClinicalTrials.gov