Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2026 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Menopausal hot flashes
INTRODUCTION
Hot flashes occur in approximately 75 to 80 percent of menopausal women in the United
States. The flashes most often begin in the perimenopausal period, although, in some
women, they do not begin until after menopause. Hot flashes are almost always due to
menopause. Other causes, including carcinoid syndrome, are uncommon ( table 1).
The prevalence, pathophysiology, and treatment of hot flashes will be reviewed here. Other
menopausal symptoms and the risks, benefits, and practical aspects of menopausal hormone
therapy (MHT) are reviewed separately. (See "Menopause: Clinical features and diagnosis" and
"Menopausal hormone therapy: Benefits and risks" and "Treatment of menopausal symptoms
with hormone therapy" and "Genitourinary syndrome of menopause: Treatment of
vulvovaginal atrophy".)
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Symptoms become far more common during the menopausal transition, with a frequency of
approximately 40 percent in the early transition and increasing to 60 to 80 percent in the late
menopausal transition and early postmenopausal stage ( figure 1) [1-5].
Prevalence and natural history — Vasomotor symptoms (VMS) or "hot flashes" are the most
common complaint during the menopausal transition, occurring in up to 80 percent of
women [2,6-8], although the frequency appears to vary by culture and ethnicity [9,10] (see
'Risk factors' below). Many to most women describe their symptoms as severe, but only
approximately 20 to 30 percent of women seek medical attention for treatment [1,11,12].
®
AUTHOR: Robert F Casper, MD
SECTION EDITOR: Robert L Barbieri, MD
DEPUTY EDITOR: Jean E Mulder, MD
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Aug 2026.
This topic last updated: Jan 06, 2026.

-- 1 of 38 --

Some women first develop hot flashes that cluster around menses during their late
reproductive years, but symptoms are typically mild and do not require treatment.
Symptoms become far more common during the menopausal transition, with a frequency of
approximately 40 percent in the early transition and increasing to 60 to 80 percent in the late
menopausal transition and early postmenopausal stage ( figure 1) [1-5].
Four different trajectories of menopausal symptoms occur with nearly equal frequency: early
onset 18.4 percent; onset near final menstrual period with later decline 29.0 percent; early
onset with persistently high frequency 25.6 percent; and persistently low frequency 27.0
percent ( figure 2) [13].
Risk factors
Duration — It had been thought that VMS diminishes and stops within a few years of onset in
most women [12]. However, accumulating data suggest that symptoms typically last far
longer [19-22]:
Obesity – Obese postmenopausal women have higher serum estrone concentrations than
lean women due to increased peripheral conversion of androstenedione in adipose tissue
[14,15], but paradoxically, these women are more likely to have hot flashes [16,17]. Weight
loss may help reduce their hot flashes [18]. (See 'Complementary and alternative therapies'
below.)
●
Smoking [16,17].	●
Reduced physical activity.	●
Socioeconomic factors – Obtaining less than a high school education and having difficulty
paying for basics are associated with a higher frequency of hot flashes [16].
●
Hormonal concentrations – Annual serum follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) levels, but not
other hormones (estradiol, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate [DHEAS]), when
collectively modeled longitudinally, are associated with both the prevalence and frequency
of VMS [1].
●
Ethnic factors – African American women report more frequent hot flashes than Caucasian
women, and Japanese and Chinese women report less [8,16].
●
In the Penn Ovarian Aging Study, the mean duration of moderate/severe hot flashes was
4.9 years, but one-third of women continued to experience moderate/severe hot flashes for
10 years after the final menstrual period (FMP) [21].
●
Nine percent of women were still experiencing hot flashes at age 72 years in one study [20].
In a second study, 8 percent of women continued to have hot flashes into their late
●

-- 2 of 38 --

The long duration of hot flashes raises treatment challenges for many women (typically no
more than four to five years to avoid excess breast cancer risk). Therefore, many women will
continue to be symptomatic after their MHT is discontinued. (See "Treatment of menopausal
symptoms with hormone therapy", section on 'Our preferred regimens'.)
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Thermoregulatory dysfunction — Hot flashes are mediated by thermoregulatory
dysfunction at the level of the hypothalamus and are induced by estrogen withdrawal [23].
The thermoneutral zone is narrowed in women with hot flashes [24]. While premenopausal
women initiate mechanisms to dissipate heat when the core body temperature increases by
0.4°C, this happens with much lower increases in temperature in menopausal women [25].
The feeling of warmth results from inappropriate peripheral vasodilatation with increased
digital and cutaneous blood flow. Perspiration results in rapid heat loss and a decrease in core
body temperature below normal. Shivering may then occur as a normal mechanism to restore
the core temperature to normal [23]. Estrogen administration restores the "thermoneutral
zone" to normal and largely abolishes hot flashes.
Role of hypoestrogenemia — The observation that prepubertal girls, whose endogenous
estrogen levels are very low, do not experience hot flashes provides evidence that
hypoestrogenemia alone is not adequate for hot flashes to occur. Data from patients with
Turner syndrome and functional hypothalamic amenorrhea suggest that exposure to adult
levels of estrogen followed by withdrawal are necessary for hot flashes to occur. (See
"Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea: Pathophysiology and clinical manifestations", section
on 'Clinical manifestations'.)
Evidence for central mediation of the changes in temperature comes from studies
demonstrating that hot flashes occur simultaneously with, but are not caused by, pulses of
luteinizing hormone (LH) [26,27]. The close proximity of the medial preoptic area (the major
menopausal years (≥20 years beyond menopause) [19].
The best estimate of total VMS duration comes from the Study of Women across the Nation
(SWAN) [22]. Among 1449 women with VMS, the median total VMS duration was 7.4 years,
with symptoms persisting for a median of 4.5 years after the FMP. Women who were
premenopausal or early perimenopausal when they first experienced VMS had the longest
total duration (>11.8 years, post-FMP median duration 9.4 years). When compared with
other racial/ethnic groups, African American women had the longest total VMS duration
(10.1 years), while Chinese and Hispanic women had the shortest (approximately five years).
The different trajectories of menopausal symptoms are described above ( figure 2). (See
'Prevalence and natural history' above.)
●

-- 3 of 38 --

thermoregulatory area in mammals) and a high density of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH)-containing neurons suggest the possibility of simultaneous activation of a burst of
GnRH release and thermoregulatory changes.
Neuroendocrine and genetic basis — One hypothesis, now supported by increasing
evidence, suggests that KNDy (kisspeptin, neurokinin B, and dynorphin) neurons mediate the
LH and thermoregulatory changes [28] observed in menopausal women. Estrogen withdrawal
affects hypothalamic KNDy neurons, causing dysregulated thermoregulation that results in
hot flashes and night sweats. Neurokinin B (NKB) (a hypothalamic neuropeptide) and its
receptor (NK3R) are also thought to be associated with vasomotor symptoms as TACR3 is the
gene that encodes NK3R, and peripheral infusion of NKB induces hot flashes in
postmenopausal women [29]. In addition, women who have variations in the gene that codes
for tachykinin receptor 3 (TACR3) are more likely to experience hot flashes than women
without those variations [30]. (See 'Neurokinin 3 receptor antagonists' below.)
TYPICAL FEATURES
Hot flashes typically begin as the sudden sensation of heat centered on the upper chest and
face that rapidly becomes generalized. The sensation of heat often lasts from two to four
minutes, is often associated with profuse perspiration and occasionally palpitations, and is
sometimes followed by chills, shivering, and a feeling of anxiety. Hot flashes may range from
an average of less than one each day to as many as one per hour during the day and night.
Hot flashes have a negative impact on quality of life as well as an association with adverse
health indicators (increased cardiovascular risk and greater bone loss/increased bone
turnover) [31,32].
Although several grading scales have been reported, a practical classification of hot flashes
and night sweats utilizes a four-point scale [33]:
It had been thought that vasomotor symptoms diminish and stop within a few years of onset
in most women. However, vasomotor symptoms can persist for as long as 20 years past the
final menstrual period (FMP) and may be variable between racial/ethnic groups [34]. (See
"Menopause: Clinical features and diagnosis", section on 'Hot flashes'.)
Not present.	●
Mild – Present but not interfering with sleep, daily activities, or work.	●
Moderate – Interfere somewhat with sleep and daily activities.	●
Severe – More frequent, severe, and bothersome hot flashes that interfere with sleep, daily
activities, and work. So bothersome that usual activities cannot be performed.
●

-- 4 of 38 --

Other causes of sweating — Other causes of sweating may mimic hot flashes or night
sweats, including the carcinoid syndrome, medications, hyperthyroidism, infection, and
malignancy, all of which are reviewed in detail separately ( table 2 and table 3). (See
"Evaluation of the patient with night sweats or generalized hyperhidrosis".)
Effect on sleep — When hot flashes occur at night, women typically describe them as "night
sweats." Vasomotor symptoms (VMS) at night can cause significant sleep disturbances in
many women [35-37]. In one study of 34 symptomatic perimenopausal women undergoing
one to five overnight polysomnographic (PSG) recordings, 69 percent of hot flashes were
associated with awakening [38]. Hot flashes, although not the only cause of sleep
disturbance, accounted for 27 percent of wakefulness during the night in these women. The
estimated prevalence of difficulty sleeping based upon two longitudinal cohort studies was 32
to 40 percent in the early menopausal transition, increasing to 38 to 46 percent in the late
transition [7,39].
PSG studies suggest that nocturnal hot flashes are more common during the first four hours
of sleep, whereas rapid eye movement (REM) sleep in the subsequent four hours suppresses
hot flashes, arousals, and awakenings [35].
Other sleep problems — VMS can disrupt sleep in peri- and postmenopausal women, but
there are many other issues that disturb sleep in this population including primary sleep
disorders, anxiety, and depression. Menopausal sleep disturbances are discussed separately.
(See "Menopause: Clinical features and diagnosis", section on 'Sleep disturbance'.)
Women with seven or more daily moderate to severe VMS (defined as with sweating or
affecting function) report interference with sleep (94 percent), concentration (84 percent),
mood (69 percent) and sexual activity (40 percent) [40]. The more severe the VMS, the more
daily activities are impacted.
MENOPAUSAL HORMONE THERAPY
General principles — The approach to management of hot flashes is based upon a number
of factors, including:
The patient's assessment of her hot flashes and their impact on function.	●
Medical history – Is the patient a candidate for menopausal hormone therapy (MHT)? (See
"Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy", section on 'Is my patient a
candidate for MHT?'.)
●
Personal choice – Is the patient interested in MHT?	●

-- 5 of 38 --

Women with mild symptoms — Women with mild flashes (hot flashes that do not interfere
with sleep, daily activities, or work) may not seek pharmacotherapy (see 'Typical features'
above). However, many do eventually seek help if symptoms worsen.
In the past, behavioral measures such as lowering room temperature, using fans, dressing in
layers of clothing that can be easily shed, and avoiding triggers (such as spicy foods and
stressful situations) were recommended. However, the efficacy of these approaches is not well
established, and the Menopause Society does not recommend them [41].
Some clinicians recommend vitamin E to women with mild hot flashes because, at low doses,
it is well-tolerated and not associated with toxicity [42]. In one report, vitamin E and placebo
were associated with reductions in hot flash frequencies of 32 and 29 percent, respectively, a
marginal difference that is not clinically important [43].
Other nonhormonal options that are often used but not recommended by the Menopause
Society include paced respiration, supplements/herbal remedies, exercise, yoga, mindfulness-
based intervention, relaxation, soy, cannabinoids, acupuncture, and clonidine [41].
Moderate to severe hot flashes — Hormonal or other pharmacotherapy is usually needed
for women with more bothersome hot flashes. For most women with moderate to very severe
hot flashes and no contraindications, we suggest menopausal hormone therapy (MHT). MHT
is the broad term used to describe both unopposed estrogen use for women who have
undergone hysterectomy and estrogen combined with progestogen therapy to prevent
estrogen-associated endometrial hyperplasia in women with an intact uterus.
The management of menopausal women who choose to take hormone therapy and the
available estrogen and progestin preparations are discussed in detail separately. (See
"Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy" and "Preparations for
menopausal hormone therapy" and "Menopausal hormone therapy: Benefits and risks".)
The majority of perimenopausal and recently menopausal women are good candidates for
hormone therapy for symptom relief. However, for women with a history of breast cancer,
coronary heart disease (CHD), a previous venous thromboembolic event (VTE) or stroke, or
those at moderate or high risk for these complications, alternatives to hormone therapy
should be suggested [44,45]. (See 'Special considerations' below and "Treatment of
menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy", section on 'Is my patient a candidate for
MHT?'.)
Coexistence of other menopausal symptoms, such as depression, as these women often
require treatment with both MHT and antidepressants (usually selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors [SSRIs]). (See "Treatment of menopausal symptoms with hormone therapy",
section on 'Perimenopausal mood disorders'.)
●

-- 6 of 38 --

