Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2026 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Healthy diet in adults
INTRODUCTION
Poor diet is one of the leading causes of mortality in the United States, along with tobacco use, hypertension, and
overweight, and is a leading cause for disability-adjusted life years [1].
Decades of research have revealed strong links between many dietary components and eating patterns and
important health outcomes [2]. Furthermore, the majority of patients and clinicians view eating habits as
important to health and an important part of healthy lifestyle counseling [3,4].
This topic will discuss the evidence on the health effects of various types of dietary patterns, dietary components,
and select foods. Although the science on the larger environmental effects of food choices, and their potential
impact on health, continues to advance, it is an issue that is outside of the current scope of this review [5].
Dietary assessment and diets for specific populations are discussed elsewhere:
IMPACT OF A HEALTHY DIET
While the specifics of healthy eating can vary, the overall goal of a healthy diet is to improve patients' health and
lower the risk of disease. Considerable evidence shows us that healthy food choices can extend longevity [6] and
reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes, hypertension, and cancer, among other important chronic
®
AUTHOR: Graham A Colditz, MD, DrPH
SECTION EDITOR: David Seres, MD
DEPUTY EDITOR: Zehra Hussain, MD, FACP
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Aug 2026.
This topic last updated: Jul 08, 2026.
(See "Dietary assessment in adults".)	●
(See "Dietary history and recommended dietary intake in children".)	●
(See "Obesity in adults: Dietary therapy".)	●
(See "Nutrition in pregnancy: Assessment and counseling".)	●
(See "Nutrition in pregnancy: Dietary requirements and supplements".)	●
(See "Nutritional issues in older adults".)	●
(See "Medical nutrition therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus".)	●
(See "Lipid management with diet or dietary supplements".)	●

-- 1 of 40 --

diseases. A healthy diet can also help with weight management and is associated with improved health-related
quality of life and a decreased risk of frailty in older adults [7-11].
With such a broad impact, population-wide improvements in diet could have a substantial impact not only on
population health but also on health care costs. Considering only cardiometabolic disease, a 2019 analysis using
the United States National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) estimated the total annual costs
related to poor diet to be approximately USD $50 billion [12]. Obesity-related medical costs have been estimated
at $150 billion USD per year [13].
CHOOSING A HEALTHY DIET: PATIENT COUNSELING
Choosing a dietary pattern — The specific diet or dietary pattern an individual chooses is strongly influenced by
a wide range of factors, including personal preference, social and cultural influences, as well as economic
considerations. While maintenance of good health or prevention of disease may be important drivers of dietary
choices, these will generally not be the patient's sole considerations; taste preferences, cost and food availability
issues, religious requirements, social norms, and media and marketing forces all contribute. As an example, the
lower cost of plant-based diets or their impact on planetary health (ie, reducing adverse climate change,
promoting environmental sustainability) may be important considerations for some patients [14,15].
Clinicians should work with individuals to determine the best healthy diet pattern based upon their unique
circumstances. Patient encounters provide a valuable opportunity to promote healthy food choices. In a 2017
systematic review evaluating the impact of behavioral interventions, there were multiple, though small, benefits
from behavioral interventions on diet and physical activity, serum lipids, body mass index, and blood pressure at
6 to 12 months [16]. While rates of such counseling have been increasing in the United States, however, in 2016,
only around one-third of patients reported receiving dietary advice from clinicians or other medical professionals
[17].
Maintaining energy balance — Although weight management is not the focus of the diets in this review, any
discussion of healthy diet needs to emphasize the importance of maintaining energy balance over time.
Overnutrition leading to overweight and obesity is the single most important dietary factor associated with poor
health outcomes. It is associated with premature mortality as well as increased incidence of cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, hypertension, cancer, and other important conditions [18-20].
Whatever dietary pattern an individual follows, maintenance of energy balance is an important overall goal.
Avoidance of weight gain, even if a patient is overweight or has obesity, can have important long-term health
benefits.
Total energy expenditure for recommended daily caloric intake is based upon age, sex, weight, and activity level
( 	table 1) (see "Obesity: Genetic contribution and pathophysiology", section on 'Physiologic processes affecting
energy balance'). Calculating a patient's daily caloric intake can be aided by using 24-hour dietary recall, a food
diary, or other assessment tools to determine intake of different foods and beverages. Assessment tools,
including consumer-focused apps and online tools that can help patients readily track what they eat and drink,
are discussed separately. (See "Dietary assessment in adults".)
SPECIFIC HEALTHY DIETARY PATTERNS
Dietary guidelines: Recommended dietary patterns — Specific dietary guidelines may vary, but in general, a
high-quality, healthy diet emphasizes limited consumption of red and processed meats, unhealthy fats (saturated
and industrial trans fats), sugar, sodium, and alcohol, and a greater intake of fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts,
and whole grains. This pattern is consistent with that generally recommended by the World Health Organization

-- 2 of 40 --

[21], the World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research [22], the American Cancer Society
[23], the American Heart association [24], and the US Department of Agriculture [25,26], as well as other groups
[27]. In addition to multiple disease-specific benefits, results of meta-analyses and individual observational
studies have found consistent associations between this dietary pattern and decreased mortality [28-35]. This
dietary pattern has also been associated with an increased likelihood of healthy aging (ie, aging without
impairments in cognitive, physical, or mental health) [36].
The development of healthy eating guidelines can vary substantially, from expert panel review of existing
evidence to the development and analysis of guideline-specific data [22]. While differences in methods may
impact the detailed conclusions of guidelines as well as the confidence in them, there is generally consistency in
messaging, both among organizations and even countries [25,37-39].
The evidence evaluating specific dietary patterns can vary substantially, and it is likely that some diets that
patients inquire about have been little studied. Although long-term randomized controlled trials are often absent,
observational studies support the association of health benefits with a number of dietary patterns.
Most of the dietary patterns discussed below share some similar aspects but are further defined by regional
characteristics or a specific focus or restriction on dietary components or types of foods.
Mediterranean diet — There is no single definition, but a
Mediterranean diet is typically high in fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, beans, nuts, and seeds. A Mediterranean diet includes olive
oil as an important source of monounsaturated fat and allows low to
moderate wine consumption. It generally includes low to moderate
amounts of fish, poultry, and dairy products, and it includes little red
meat ( 	table 2). Although the Mediterranean diet is associated
with several health benefits, it remains uncertain if a single
component of the Mediterranean diet is associated with the
protective benefit or if the benefit results from an aggregation of
effects.
In a meta-analysis of randomized trials including the large
PREDIMED trial [40], a Mediterranean diet reduced the risk of
stroke compared with a low-fat diet (hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI
0.45-0.80) but did not reduce the incidence of cardiovascular or overall mortality [41].
●
In a subsequent 2022 trial including over 1000 adults with coronary heart disease conducted in Spain
(CORDIOPREV), randomization to a Mediterranean diet resulted in fewer major cardiovascular events
(myocardial infarction, revascularization, ischemic stroke, peripheral artery disease, cardiovascular death)
compared with a low-fat diet at seven years' follow-up [42].
●
In a network meta-analysis of 40 trials comparing seven dietary patterns among 35, 548 participants at
increased risk of CVD, a Mediterranean diet (12 trials) resulted in lower risk of several outcomes including all-
cause mortality (odds ratio [OR] 0.72, 95% CI 0.56-0.92), cardiovascular mortality (OR 0.55, 95% CI 0.39-0.78),
stroke (OR 0.65, 95% CI 0.46-0.93), and nonfatal myocardial infarction (OR 0.48, 95% CI 0.36-0.65), when
compared with minimal intervention [43].
●
In observational studies, a Mediterranean diet has been associated with lower overall mortality and
cardiovascular mortality [44-48], as well as a decreased incidence of Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease,
and cancers, including colorectal, prostate, aerodigestive, oropharyngeal, and breast cancers [45,46,49-51].
(See "Factors that modify breast cancer risk in females", section on 'Diet rich in fruits and vegetables, fish,
and olive oil (eg, Mediterranean diet)'.)
●
Healthy Mediterranean-style dietary
pattern for children and adults
Table 2 - larger image below

-- 3 of 40 --

The effects of the Mediterranean diet on type 2 diabetes mellitus and macular degeneration are discussed
separately. (See "Medical nutrition therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus", section on 'Macronutrient composition'
and "Age-related macular degeneration", section on 'Diet/alcohol'.)
DASH diet — 	The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet is composed of four to five servings
of fruit, four to five servings of vegetables, and two to three servings of low-fat dairy per day, with <25 percent
of daily caloric intake from fat.
The DASH diet has been studied in both normotensive and hypertensive populations and has been found to
lower systolic and diastolic pressure more than a diet rich in fruits and vegetables alone [52]. The combination
of low-sodium and DASH diet resulted in further decreases in blood pressure, comparable with those observed
with antihypertensive agents [53]. (See "Salt intake and hypertension" and "Diet in the treatment and
prevention of hypertension".)
The DASH diet has also been associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, cardiovascular disease,
premature mortality, and gout (in males) [34,54-58]. These benefits have not been confirmed in randomized
trials [59], although available trials all have fairly short follow-up periods (up to 18 months), limiting conclusions
about the impact on chronic diseases. (See "Gout: Nonpharmacologic strategies for prevention and treatment",
section on 'Modifying diet'.)
Plant-based and vegetarian diets — Plant-based diets, which include vegetarian (and similar) diets, focus on
the consumption of cereals, fruits, vegetables, legumes, and nuts, with the restriction of animal-based foods,
including meat, dairy products, and eggs ( 	table 3) [60]. The degree of animal food restriction in plant-based
eating varies considerably [61]. Vegan diets exclude all animal-based foods, while less restrictive approaches
can include eggs, dairy products, and some meat. Selected plant-based diets may be grouped as follows:
The long-term effects of a plant-based diets on health outcomes may be difficult to separate from lifestyle
factors associated with consumption of a plant-based diet (eg, regular exercise, avoidance of tobacco and
alcohol products). However, observational studies suggest that consumption of plant-based and vegetarian
diets is associated with lower risk of obesity, coronary heart disease, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, certain
cancers, and possibly all-cause mortality [63-74]. Results of randomized trials have found a beneficial impact of
vegetarian diets on a number of cardiovascular risk factors [75,76]. As an example, in a meta-analysis of 20
randomized trials (n = 1878) of individuals with or at high risk for cardiovascular disease, following a vegetarian
diet for an average of six months reduced the cardiovascular risk factors of LDL-C (low density lipoprotein
cholesterol), hemoglobin A1C, and weight by 6.6 mg/dL, 0.24 percent, and 3.4 kg, respectively [77]. Although
Vegan – All animal products, including eggs, milk, and milk products, are excluded from the diet. Some
vegans do not use honey and may refrain from using animal products such as leather or wool. They also may
avoid foods that are processed or not organically grown [62].
●
Lactovegetarian – Milk and milk products are included in the diet, but no eggs or meat are consumed.	●
Lacto-ovovegetarian – Eggs, milk, and milk products (lacto = dairy; ovo = eggs) are included, but no meat is
consumed.
●
Semi-vegetarian (flexitarian) – Meat occasionally is included in the diet. Some people who follow such a diet
may not eat red meat but may eat fish (pescatarian) or chicken (pollotarian). The Mediterranean diet could be
considered a semi-vegetarian, plant-based diet. (See 'Mediterranean diet' above.)
●
Macrobiotic – Vegetables, fruits, legumes, and seaweeds are included in the diet, while whole grains,
especially brown rice, are also emphasized. Locally grown fruits are recommended. Animal foods are
generally limited to white meat or fish, which may be included in the diet once or twice a week.
●

-- 4 of 40 --

one observational study suggested a modestly increased risk of stroke with a vegetarian diet in older adults (at
approximately 85 years old), the risk estimate was imprecise and has not been observed in other studies [73].
The nutritional adequacy and quality of plant-based and vegetarian diets should be judged individually, based
on the type, amount, and variety of nutrients that are consumed [78]. As an example, some but not all studies
suggest that vegan diets (which exclude all animal-based products, including dairy) may be associated with
lower bone mineral density and higher fracture risk due to lower intake of calcium [79,80]. In addition,
individuals whose diet excludes all animal products (ie, meat, eggs, milk, and milk products) are at risk for
inadequate vitamin B12 intake and may benefit from vitamin B12 supplementation. (See "Vitamin intake and
disease prevention", section on 'Special diets'.)
Additionally, as with other healthy eating patterns, plant-based diets should emphasize the consumption of
lesser amounts of processed foods as well as foods that are low in unhealthy fats, refined grains, sugar, and
sodium.
Low-fat diet — Low-fat diets focus on limiting calories from fat. Some approaches are very low-fat, with
calories from fat ≤10 percent of total calories; others are more moderate, with ≤30 percent of daily caloric
intake from fat.
Most evidence also points to little or no health or mortality benefit from a low-fat dietary pattern [81-83],
although other analyses suggest some possible mortality, coronary heart disease, diabetes, and breast cancer
survival benefits [43,84].
Compared with higher-fat diets, lower-fat diets are associated with lower body adiposity [85]. Overall, however,
low-fat diets have been found to be no more effective than other types of diets for weight control [86,87]. This
is discussed in detail separately. (See "Obesity in adults: Dietary therapy", section on 'Low-fat diets'.)
Individuals choosing a reduced-fat diet should focus on food quality in addition to fat content. A 2020
prospective cohort study using data from the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)
found that an unhealthy low-fat diet was associated with a modest increase in total mortality, while a healthy
low-fat diet was associated with a modest decrease in total mortality [88]. While consuming a reduced-fat diet,
the emphasis should be on whole grains, legumes, fruits, and vegetables, with limited refined grains and
sugar; fat should be from healthy sources, such as fatty fish, olive oil, and canola oil.
Low-cholesterol diet — A low-cholesterol diet focuses on limiting the amount of dietary cholesterol, which can
be found in higher levels in foods such as certain shellfish, full-fat dairy, and eggs.
While elevated serum levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol are an established risk factor for the
development of cardiovascular disease, the relationship between dietary cholesterol intake and cardiovascular
disease is less certain [89,90]. Because of their cholesterol content, eggs have often been restricted in low-
cholesterol diets. A 2020 systematic review and meta-analysis of egg consumption found no association
between daily intake of a single egg and risk of cardiovascular disease [91]. Similar overall null results were
found for type 2 diabetes, although a small increase in risk with moderate egg consumption was seen in United
States study populations [92]. However, in a subsequent 2021 observational study including over 96,000
postmenopausal females without known cardiovascular disease at baseline, higher egg consumption (≥1
egg/day versus <1 egg/week) was associated with greater risk of incident cardiovascular disease and total
mortality (HR 1.14, 95% CI 1.04-1.25; and HR 1.14, 95% CI 1.07-1.22, respectively) [93].
For cardiovascular disease risk reduction, a diet low in saturated fat is the preferred approach. (See 'Unhealthy
fats' below.)

-- 5 of 40 --

DIETARY COMPONENTS ASSOCIATED WITH HEALTH BENEFITS
Although we focus on overall dietary patterns, individual dietary components can play an important role in
nutrition and health outcomes and can offer patients specific areas to focus their efforts at improving their diet.
Fruits and vegetables — Patients should be counseled to consume three servings of vegetables and two
servings of fruit per day for a 2000 calorie diet ( 	table 4) [25]. Fruits and vegetables are a rich source of fiber,
essential vitamins and minerals, and other potentially beneficial compounds, as well as carbohydrates with a low
glycemic index. (See 'Fiber' below and "Vitamin intake and disease prevention".)
In large, prospective cohort studies, increased consumption of fruits and vegetables is associated with decreased
all-cause and coronary heart disease mortality [94-97]. Several studies suggest that fruit and vegetable
consumption is associated with a lower risk of coronary heart disease and stroke [98-100]. While large
prospective cohort studies have not found a substantial effect of fruits and vegetables on cancer incidence in the
general population, there is evidence of impact on some specific cancers, including aerodigestive cancers [101]
and estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer. Some observational studies also support an association between
higher intake of tomatoes and tomato-based products with a lower risk of prostate cancer [102,103]. (See
"Overview of cancer prevention", section on 'Fruits and vegetables'.)
Whole grains — Individuals should consume at least two to four
servings a day of whole grains, which tend to be fiber-rich, as
recommended by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans ( 	table 5)
[25,26].
Common types of food made from grain include breads, breakfast
cereals, oatmeal, tortillas, and pasta. Grain products vary by level of
milling or processing and can be defined as follows:
Increased consumption of whole grains is associated with a variety of health benefits, including improved weight
management, reduction in cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, and decreased incidence of coronary heart
disease and cancer [104-107]. Representative studies include:
Refined grains (eg, white rice, white bread, refined and sweetened
cereals) have bran and germ removed during processing, which also
removes fiber, iron, B vitamins, and other nutrients. Processing
produces a finer texture and improves shelf life.
●
Enriched grains are refined grains that have iron and B vitamins
added back, but not fiber in most cases.
●
Whole-grain foods include brown rice, whole-wheat bread, whole-
grain cereal, and oatmeal. These are a good source of fiber and other nutrients and are considered
carbohydrates with a lower glycemic index.
●
In a prospective study of over 120,000 healthy individuals, an increased intake in refined grains was associated
with long-term weight gain, whereas an increased intake in whole grains was associated with weight loss [105].
●
In a 2014 meta-analysis of 18 studies including over 400,000 participants, increased whole-grain intake was
associated with decreased risk for coronary heart disease (relative risk [RR] 0.79, 95% CI 0.74-0.83) [106].
●
In a pooled prospective cohort study including over 117,000 individuals, higher whole-grain consumption was
associated with lower cardiovascular (RR 0.85, 95% CI 0.78-0.92) and total (RR 0.91, 95% CI 0.88-0.95) mortality
●
USDA recommended daily or weekly
caloric intake of different food
groups (USDA recommended
average daily food intake)
Table 5 - larger image below

-- 6 of 40 --

The World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research, in their Third Expert Report: Diet,
Nutrition, Physical Activity and Cancer, recommends increased dietary intake of whole grains to reduce the risk of
developing colorectal cancer [101].
Fiber — The recommended amount of dietary fiber is approximately 14 g per 1000 calories, which translates to
approximately 25 g to 34 g per day for most adults ( 	table 6) [25].
Fiber is the portion of plants that cannot be digested by enzymes in the gastrointestinal tract. Fiber is available in
a large variety of natural foods and supplements ( 	table 7). Patients should be advised to replace refined grains
(eg, white rice, white bread) with whole grains (eg, brown rice, whole-wheat bread), which have higher fiber
content.
Increased fiber intake is associated with many health benefits, including a decreased risk of coronary heart
disease, cardiovascular and all-cause mortality, colorectal cancer, stroke, and type 2 diabetes [101,104,108-116].
High-fiber diets may in part protect against coronary heart disease by controlling cardiovascular risk factors,
including lowering insulin levels and blood pressure, and improving lipid profiles [117,118].
The benefit of increased fiber intake is also observed in people with established cardiovascular disease. For
example, in a prospective cohort study following 4000 patients after a first myocardial infarction, eating a high-
fiber diet (post-myocardial infarction) was associated with lower cardiovascular and all-cause mortality (RR 0.72,
95% CI 0.52-0.99; and RR 0.73, 95% 0.58-0.91, respectively) [119]. The largest benefit was seen among those with
the greatest increase in fiber consumption, comparing pre- and post-myocardial infarction fiber intake.
Further details on dietary fiber in managing and preventing disease are discussed separately. (See "Nutritional
considerations in type 1 diabetes mellitus" and "Medical nutrition therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus" and
"Overview of cancer prevention", section on 'Fruits and vegetables' and "Type 2 diabetes mellitus: Prevalence and
risk factors", section on 'Dietary patterns' and "Epidemiology and risk factors for colorectal cancer", section on
'Fiber'.)
Reduced-fat dairy — The United States Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that adults consume
three servings of dairy products daily for a 2000-calorie diet ( 	table 5) [25].
The dairy food group is composed of milk and foods made from milk, such as yogurt and cheese. Dairy products
are a good source of protein, calcium, vitamin D, and potassium. Diets that include limited amounts of dairy
should ensure adequate intake of these nutrients from other sources.
Intake of dairy products likely lowers the risk of colorectal cancer [101] and possibly cardiovascular disease [120-
122]. Low-fat dairy is also integral part of the DASH diet, which has been shown to help control blood pressure as
well as lower the risk of colorectal cancer, cardiovascular disease, and premature mortality. (See 'DASH diet'
above.).
The data regarding the cardiovascular effects of dairy are conflicting [123]. Some observational studies have
found an association between dairy consumption and lower risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality. As an
example, in a multinational cohort study including over 130,000 patients followed for more than nine years,
higher intake of total dairy was associated with lower total mortality, cardiovascular mortality, major
cardiovascular disease, and stroke [122]. However, other studies have not found such an association. Moreover, it
is uncertain whether consuming low-fat versus full-fat dairy has differential health effects. Most guidelines have
traditionally recommended low-fat dairy, largely due to concerns around saturated fat content of full-fat dairy.
However, meta-analyses of observational studies have not consistently found a differential health effect of low-fat
versus full-fat dairy [124,125].
[107].

-- 7 of 40 --

Protein-rich foods — We agree with the 2020 to 2025 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which recommend that
individuals consume 5.5 ounces of protein-rich foods daily for a 2000 calorie diet ( 	table 5) [25]. This is
equivalent to approximately 35 to 45 grams of protein daily, or approximately 0.5 to 0.6 grams per kilogram for a
70-kilogram adult, which is the minimum needed to maintain a neutral nitrogen balance [126]. Healthy protein-
rich foods include poultry, beans, peas, seeds, nuts, fish, and soy products (eg, tofu and tempeh). (See 'Healthy
fats' below.)
In contrast, the 2025 to 2030 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommend a higher protein intake goal of 1.2 to
1.6 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day (approximately 80 to 112 grams for a 70 kilogram adult)
[26]. However, there is no high-quality evidence to support this higher goal in the general population.
Nuts — Nut consumption is associated with lower risk for cardiovascular disease. One study that combined
data from three large cohorts found that the risk of myocardial infarction or stroke was reduced among
participants who consumed nuts five or more times per week compared with participants who rarely ate nuts
(hazard ratio [HR] 0.86, 95% CI 0.79-0.93) [127]. Peanuts, tree nuts, and walnuts were all associated with similar
reductions in the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Fish — One to two servings (total of eight ounces) of oily fish (eg, salmon and tuna) per week is suggested for
most adults, with special consideration regarding mercury content of particular seafoods for individuals who
are pregnant, planning pregnancy, and breastfeeding [25,128]. Reference levels for mercury in commercial fish
and shellfish are available 	online, and information for patients is available from the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) ( 	list of fish categorized by mercury concentration). (See "Fish consumption and marine
omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in pregnancy", section on 'Fish'.)
In a 2014 meta-analysis of 11 prospective cohort studies, fish consumption ≥4 times per week was associated
with a decreased risk of acute coronary syndrome (RR 0.79, 95% CI 0.70-0.89) with a dose-response relationship
(each additional 100 g serving per week associated with RR 0.95, 95% CI 0.92-0.97) [129]. In a subsequent
pooled analysis of several international cohort studies, consuming two servings of fish weekly was associated
with lower risk of major CVD and mortality among persons with existing CVD (HR 0.84, 95% CI 0.73-0.96; and
HR 0.82, 95% CI 0.74-0.91, respectively), but not in those without CVD [130]. (See "Overview of primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults", section on 'Omega-3 fatty acids'.)
Healthy fats — Saturated fat should make up no more than 10 percent of total caloric intake, as recommended
by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans [25].
The type of fat consumed appears to be more important than the amount of total fat ( 	table 8). Individuals
should choose poly- and monounsaturated fats in place of saturated and trans fats [131] (see 'Unhealthy fats'
below). Consumption of polyunsaturated fats can improve serum lipids and lower the risk of CVD and total
mortality [131-134]. In a meta-analysis of four randomized controlled trials including individuals without coronary
heart disease, replacement of dietary saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat reduced the risk of coronary heart
disease by 29 percent compared with no intervention (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.62-0.81) [131]. (See "Dietary fat", section
on 'Type of fat' and "Lipid management with diet or dietary supplements".)
Good sources of polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats are
certain oils (eg, olive, canola, and peanut) ( 	figure 1), as well as
avocados, certain nuts, and fatty fish.
DIETARY PATTERNS WITH LIMITED OR DEVELOPING
EVIDENCE

-- 8 of 40 --

The list of diets with limited evidence of benefit is very long and
potentially unlimited, as new diets and eating patterns regularly
emerge both in the medical literature and popular media. Here, we
highlight diets that patients may be likely to inquire about or that
show potential evidence of health benefits.
Low-carbohydrate diet — Low-carbohydrate diets emphasize protein and fat intake with limited carbohydrate
intake. The level of carbohydrate restriction in low-carbohydrate diets can vary significantly.
Ketogenic diets (high in dietary fat and low in carbohydrates, which causes the body to produce ketones from
body fat to use for fuel) can have very few carbohydrates, often under 50 g per day, while some low-carbohydrate
diets can have 40 percent of total calories from carbohydrates. The more restrictive the diet, however, the more
difficult long-term maintenance can be for patients.
Low-carbohydrate diets may aid in weight loss and possibly improve serum lipids over the short term, although
results for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol are mixed [135,136]. In addition, the health effects of low-
carbohydrate diets over the longer term remain unclear and may depend upon overall dietary food quality;
unhealthy low-carbohydrate diets (eg, higher in animal protein and saturated fat) have been found in
observational studies to be associated with an increased mortality risk, while healthy low-carbohydrate diets
(higher in plant protein and unsaturated fats) associated with a lower risk [88,137,138].
Organic diet — There is significant interest in the potential health benefits of eating an organic diet. Although
there are regulatory definitions for what qualifies as organic produce and organic egg, meat, and dairy products
[139], there is a lack of established methodology in assessing what actually qualifies as an organic diet. In
addition, complicating the research on the impact of organic food on health is the difficulty of taking fully into
account the potential confounders linked with organic food consumption (eg, other elements of a healthy
lifestyle) [140].
Despite great interest in the area, high-quality data are still lacking on the links between the consumption of
organic food and improved health. While eating a diet high in organic foods can lessen exposure to synthetic
pesticides, it is unclear if this actually translates to improved health outcomes [140,141]. Growing evidence does,
however, point to a possible link between high organic food intake and a lower risk of cancer, particularly non-
Hodgkin lymphoma [142,143]. Further evidence from well-designed studies is needed to confirm this association.
Anti-inflammatory diet — The anti-inflammatory diet focuses on food choices that may reduce systemic
inflammation. Chronic inflammation is linked to an increased risk of multiple chronic diseases, including
cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and cancer [144].
There is no specific anti-inflammatory diet, and aspects of other healthy diets qualify as anti-inflammatory (see
'Mediterranean diet' above). Overall, however, an anti-inflammatory diet emphasizes choices such as olive oil,
nuts, fruits, leafy green vegetables, and fatty fish; and limits processed meats, refined grains, sugar, and fried
food. Compared with anti-inflammatory diets, those diets that "promote" inflammation have been linked in
observational studies with multiple health risks, including an increased risk of total, cancer, and cardiovascular
disease-related mortality [144-146]. The science on anti-inflammatory diet continues to develop.
Gluten-free diet — A gluten-free diet eliminates or substantially limits grains that contain the protein gluten,
such as wheat and barley ( 	table 9). In individuals with celiac disease and non-celiac gluten sensitivity, a gluten-
free diet has demonstrated benefits (see "Management of celiac disease in adults" and "Celiac disease in children
and adolescents: Management"). Outside of those with gluten sensitivity, however, little evidence supports health
benefits from a gluten-free diet, and some evidence suggests increased risk of cardiovascular disease due to
related reductions in whole grain intake [147].
Fat content of oils
Figure 1 - larger image below

-- 9 of 40 --

DIETARY PATTERNS AND COMPONENTS TO LIMIT OR AVOID
There is good evidence associating certain dietary patterns and individual dietary components with adverse
health outcomes. Individuals should be encouraged to limit and, in some instances, avoid these components.
Realistically, however, elimination may be too drastic for many patients, and a reduction in consumption is a more
attainable goal, at least initially.
"Western" diet — Studies consistently show that the typical Western diet increases the risk of multiple chronic
diseases. The Western diet is marked by consumption of red and processed meats, full-fat dairy products, refined
grains, high-sodium foods, and sugar, as well as and low amounts of fiber, whole grains, legumes, and fruits and
vegetables.
Compared with healthy eating patterns, the Western diet is linked to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease,
type 2 diabetes, cancer, overweight and obesity, and other conditions. In 2016, poor diet was the leading cause of
death and the third leading cause for disability-adjusted life-years in the United States [148]. Individuals should
be encouraged to avoid the typical Western diet in favor of healthier eating patterns that are more plant-based,
with a focus on healthy fats and fewer processed products.
Unhealthy fats — Individuals should limit saturated and trans fats, replacing them with healthy fats such as
polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats. (See 'Healthy fats' above and "Dietary fat", section on 'Type of fat'.)
Added sugars and sugar-sweetened beverages — Added sugars should be avoided in the diet [25,26]. These
sugars often come from sweetened beverages and processed foods. If a higher percentage of caloric intake
comes from added sugars, it may be difficult for individuals to meet their nutritional needs within caloric limits.
The US FDA requires that nutrition labels list a food's quantity of added sugars [151].
Naturally occurring sugars (eg, from fruit or milk) are not considered added sugars. However, fruit juices should
still be limited to small daily amounts, if any, as they tend to be high in calories without the added benefit of fiber,
which is found in whole fruit.
Saturated fat – Saturated fat should make up no more than 10 percent of total caloric intake, as recommended
by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans [26], as it has been shown to adversely impact serum lipids and
increase the risk of cardiovascular disease [131]. As an example, in a meta-analysis of four randomized trials
with a minimum two-year duration, replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat reduced the risk of
coronary heart disease by almost 30 percent (RR 0.71, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.81) [131].
●
The effect of reducing saturated fat on mortality is less certain. In a meta-analysis of randomized trials, lower
saturated fat intake reduced cardiovascular mortality (RR 0.93, CI 0.77 to 1.11) and all-cause mortality (RR 0.96,
95% CI 0.88-1.06), but the confidence intervals were wide and included no effect [149]. The absolute benefit
was greatest in those with higher baseline cardiovascular risk and most pronounced when replacing saturated
with polyunsaturated fat. However, most of the included studies were at high risk of bias due to methodologic
limitations (eg, lack of blinding).
Saturated fats are common in animal products, such as red meat and whole-fat dairy, and in some plant
products, such as coconut and palm oils.
Trans fats – Trans fats used to be common in many foods in the United States but since 2018 have been largely
removed from the food supply following a US Food and Drug Administration ban on their use [150]. However,
some foods can still include some trans fat, such as some fast foods and shortenings and oils with
hydrogenated oil listed in the ingredients.
●

-- 10 of 40 --

Soft drinks and other sugar-sweetened beverages (eg, fruit drinks, sports drinks, and energy drinks) should also
be avoided [25,26] Sugar-sweetened beverages are a key contributor to weight gain and obesity [101]. Their
consumption is also associated with lower intake of key nutrients because they replace nutrient-dense foods in
the diet. In addition to excess weight, intake of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with an increased risk of
coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, gout, metabolic syndrome, and all-cause mortality [152-
159]. Individuals should be encouraged to drink plain water rather than sweetened beverages.
Artificial sweeteners — Consumption of foods and beverages containing artificial sweeteners generally does
not produce long-term weight loss and may be associated with health risks, including increased risks of
cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, incident depression, and all-cause mortality. The health effects of
nonnutritive sweeteners are discussed separately. (See "Overview of nonnutritive sweeteners", section on 'Health
effects of NNS consumption'.)
Guidelines from the World Health Organization recommend against the use of non-sugar sweeteners (eg,
aspartame, sucralose, stevia, saccharin) for weight loss or the reduction of chronic disease risk [160,161].
Red and processed meats — We counsel patients to limit red (eg, beef, lamb, veal, venison, goat) and processed
(eg, sausage, hot dogs, beef jerky, bologna) meat, because increased consumption has been associated with a
small to moderate increased risk of numerous diseases and premature mortality [162,163]. Although modest,
and unconfirmed by randomized trials, these risks are potentially important given the high level of red meat
consumption in the United States and increasing consumption of red meat globally. In addition, red and
processed meat are typically high in saturated fat, which has been shown to increase cardiovascular risk. (See
'Unhealthy fats' above.)
As examples, in meta-analyses and pooled analyses of prospective cohort studies, increased consumption of red
and processed meat has been associated with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes [164], stroke [165], and
multiple cancers [166-168], as well as increased cardiovascular disease mortality [169].
The association with negative health effects appears to be stronger and more consistently demonstrated for
processed compared with unprocessed red meat [170-175].
In the 2021 Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) Study, an international cohort study including over
134,000 participants followed for 9.5 years, a higher risk of major CVD and mortality was noted among those
whose diets contained high amounts of processed meat (HR 1.46, 95% CI 1.08-1.98; and HR 1.51, 95% CI 1.08-
2.10, respectively); however, the risks were not increased with consumption of unprocessed red meat [176].
In addition, the reduction of red or processed meat appears to be very modestly associated with reduced
mortality. As an example, in a meta-analysis of observational studies, decreased consumption of processed red
meat and unprocessed red meat were both associated with a reduction in cardiovascular and all-cause mortality,
but the magnitude of reduction was greater and more certain for processed red meat (all-cause mortality: RR
0.92 [95% CI 0.87-0.96] with reduction of processed meat; RR 0.93 [95% CI 0.87-1.00] with reduction of
unprocessed meat) [173].
Our guidance to limit or avoid red and processed meats aligns with guidance from the American Heart
Association [24,177] and American Cancer Society [23]. In contrast, other guidelines, including the 2025 to 2030
Dietary Guidelines for Americans, do not advise reducing unprocessed red meat [26,37].
Of note, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classifies processed meat as a Group 1 human
carcinogen, and red meat as "probably carcinogenic to humans" [178]. (See "Epidemiology and risk factors for
colorectal cancer", section on 'Red and processed meat'.)

-- 11 of 40 --

Highly processed foods — We advise limiting highly processed foods as much as possible as part of a healthy
diet [26]. A growing body of evidence links consumption of highly processed foods with health risks [156,163,179-
187]. Although the definition of highly or ultra-processed foods varies, it typically includes items such as sweet
and savory snacks, reconstituted meats, packaged frozen entrées, instant soups, and sweetened drinks. Highly
processed foods are often calorie-dense; higher in refined grains, sugar, saturated fat, and salt; and lower in fiber
and other important nutrients.
Data from meta-analyses of large, observational studies suggest an association between consumption of highly
processed foods and a range of adverse health outcomes [188]. As an example, in one systematic review,
exposure to ultraprocessed foods was associated with 32 adverse health parameters, including increased risks of
all-cause and cardiovascular disease mortality, type 2 diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular events, anxiety, and
combined common mental health disorders [189]. The quality of evidence ranged from low to very low for most
of these associations.
Alcohol — While certain diets and dietary guidelines allow for moderate alcohol consumption, growing evidence
supports the message that zero alcohol is the best choice for patients' overall health [148]. Even light alcohol
consumption of three to six drinks per week has been associated with a small increased risk for breast cancer in
females as well as increased risk for oropharyngeal and esophageal cancer [190]. A Global Burden of Disease
Study analysis found that cancer risk increased monotonically with increasing alcohol intake [148]. Although
moderate alcohol use may have beneficial effects on cardiovascular health limited to older adults, the increased
risks of cancer and other harms likely offset such benefits [148,191]. (See "Overview of the risks and benefits of
alcohol consumption", section on 'Cardiovascular disease'.)
The risks and benefits of alcohol consumption are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Overview of the risks and
benefits of alcohol consumption", section on 'Is there a safe dose of alcohol?'.)
SOCIETY GUIDELINE LINKS
Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions around the world are
provided separately. (See "Society guideline links: Vitamin deficiencies" and "Society guideline links: Healthy diet
in adults".)
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS
UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the Basics." The Basics
patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5 to 6 grade reading level, and they answer the
four or five key questions a patient might have about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who
want a general overview and who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education
pieces are longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10 to 12 grade
reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are comfortable with some medical
jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to print or e-mail these
topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on a variety of subjects by searching on
"patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)
th 	th
th 	th
Basics topics (see "Patient education: Healthy eating for adults (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Making
healthy choices when eating out (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Vegetarian or vegan diet (The Basics)"
and "Patient education: Vitamin supplements (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Can foods or supplements
lower cholesterol? (The Basics)" and "Patient education: DASH diet (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Good
●

-- 12 of 40 --

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
food sources of iron (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Low-carbohydrate diet (The Basics)" and "Patient
education: Low-fat diet (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Mediterranean diet (The Basics)" and "Patient
education: Anti-inflammatory diet (The Basics)")
Beyond the Basics topics (see "Patient education: Diet and health (Beyond the Basics)" and "Patient education:
High-fiber diet (Beyond the Basics)")
●
Impact of a healthy diet – Healthy food choices can extend longevity and reduce the risk of cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, hypertension, and cancer, among other important chronic diseases. A healthy diet can also
help with weight management and improve health-related quality of life. (See 'Impact of a healthy diet' above.)
●
Choosing a healthy diet or dietary pattern – The specific diet or dietary pattern an individual chooses is
influenced by a wide range of factors, including personal preference, social and cultural influences, as well as
economic considerations. Clinicians should work with individuals to determine the best healthy diet pattern
based upon their unique circumstances. (See 'Choosing a healthy diet: Patient counseling' above.)
●
What are healthy dietary patterns? – Specific dietary guidelines may vary, but in general, a high-quality,
healthy diet emphasizes limited consumption of red and processed meats, unhealthy fats (saturated and
industrial trans fats), sugar, sodium, and alcohol, and a greater intake of fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts, and
whole grains. (See 'Dietary guidelines: Recommended dietary patterns' above.)
●
Examples of healthy dietary patterns associated with health benefits include the Mediterranean diet, the
Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, plant-based and vegetarian diets, a low-fat diet, and a
low-cholesterol diet. Most of these dietary patterns share some similar aspects but are further defined by
regional characteristics or a specific focus or restriction on dietary components or types of foods ( 	table 2
and 	table 3 and 	table 4). (See 'Mediterranean diet' above and 'DASH diet' above and 'Plant-based and
vegetarian diets' above and 'Low-fat diet' above and 'Low-cholesterol diet' above.)
•
Specific healthy dietary components – Although we focus on overall dietary patterns, individual dietary
components can play an important role in nutrition and health outcomes and can offer patients specific areas
to focus their efforts at improving their diet. (See 'Dietary components associated with health benefits' above.)
●
Specific healthy dietary components include fruits and vegetables, whole grains, fiber, dairy, and certain
protein-rich foods, such as nuts, fish, and soy products. (See 'Fruits and vegetables' above and 'Whole grains'
above and 'Fiber' above and 'Reduced-fat dairy' above and 'Protein-rich foods' above.)
•
Dietary patterns with limited evidence of health benefits – The list of diets with limited evidence of benefit
is very long and potentially unlimited, as new diets and eating patterns regularly emerge. Examples of dietary
patterns with limited supporting evidence include a low-carbohydrate diet, an organic diet, an anti-
inflammatory diet, and a gluten-free diet. (See 'Low-carbohydrate diet' above and 'Organic diet' above and
'Anti-inflammatory diet' above and 'Gluten-free diet' above.)
●
Dietary patterns and specific components to avoid – Individuals should avoid consumption of a typical
"Western" diet (characterized by consumption of red and processed meats, refined grains, high-sodium foods,
and sugar, as well as low amounts of fiber, whole grains, legumes, and fruits and vegetables), and avoid or
minimize consumption of unhealthy fats (ie, saturated and trans fats), added sugars (including sugar-
sweetened beverages), red and processed meats, highly processed foods, and alcohol. (See 'Dietary patterns
and components to limit or avoid' above.)
●

-- 13 of 40 --

Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES
1. US Burden of Disease Collaborators, Mokdad AH, Ballestros K, et al. The State of US Health, 1990-2016:
Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Among US States. JAMA 2018; 319:1444.
2. Willett W. Nutritional Epidemiology, 3rd ed, Oxford University Press, 2013.
3. Weinehall L, Johansson H, Sorensen J, et al. Counseling on lifestyle habits in the United States and Sweden: a
report comparing primary care health professionals' perspectives on lifestyle counseling in terms of scope,
importance and competence. BMC Fam Pract 2014; 15:83.
4. Jerdén L, Dalton J, Johansson H, et al. Lifestyle counseling in primary care in the United States and Sweden: a
comparison of patients' expectations and experiences. Glob Health Action 2018; 11:1438238.
5. Willett W, Rockström J, Loken B, et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission on healthy diets
from sustainable food systems. Lancet 2019; 393:447.
6. English LK, Ard JD, Bailey RL, et al. Evaluation of Dietary Patterns and All-Cause Mortality: A Systematic
Review. JAMA Netw Open 2021; 4:e2122277.
7. Mancini JG, Filion KB, Atallah R, Eisenberg MJ. Systematic Review of the Mediterranean Diet for Long-Term
Weight Loss. Am J Med 2016; 129:407.
8. Govindaraju T, Sahle BW, McCaffrey TA, et al. Dietary Patterns and Quality of Life in Older Adults: A
Systematic Review. Nutrients 2018; 10.
9. Xu F, Cohen SA, Lofgren IE, et al. Relationship between Diet Quality, Physical Activity and Health-Related
Quality of Life in Older Adults: Findings from 2007-2014 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. J
Nutr Health Aging 2018; 22:1072.
10. Zhong VW, Ning H, Van Horn L, et al. Diet Quality and Long-Term Absolute Risks for Incident Cardiovascular
Disease and Mortality. Am J Med 2021; 134:490.
11. Goshen A, Goldbourt U, Benyamini Y, et al. Diet Quality and Incident Frailty in Adults 65 Years or Older: The
Israeli Longitudinal Study on Aging. Mayo Clin Proc 2023; 98:1774.
12. Jardim TV, Mozaffarian D, Abrahams-Gessel S, et al. Cardiometabolic disease costs associated with
suboptimal diet in the United States: A cost analysis based on a microsimulation model. PLoS Med 2019;
16:e1002981.
13. Kim DD, Basu A. Estimating the Medical Care Costs of Obesity in the United States: Systematic Review, Meta-
Analysis, and Empirical Analysis. Value Health 2016; 19:602.
14. Shah UA, Merlo G. Personal and Planetary Health-The Connection With Dietary Choices. JAMA 2023;
329:1823.
15. Kahleova H, Sutton M, Maracine C, et al. Vegan Diet and Food Costs Among Adults With Overweight: A
Secondary Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open 2023; 6:e2332106.
16. Patnode CD, Evans CV, Senger CA, et al. Behavioral Counseling to Promote a Healthful Diet and Physical
Activity for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Adults Without Known Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors:
Updated Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 2017;
318:175.
17. Ahmed NU, Delgado M, Saxena A. Trends and disparities in the prevalence of physicians' counseling on diet
and nutrition among the U.S. adult population, 2000-2011. Prev Med 2016; 89:70.
18. Adams KF, Schatzkin A, Harris TB, et al. Overweight, obesity, and mortality in a large prospective cohort of
persons 50 to 71 years old. N Engl J Med 2006; 355:763.

-- 14 of 40 --

19. Renehan AG, Tyson M, Egger M, et al. Body-mass index and incidence of cancer: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Lancet 2008; 371:569.
20. Willett WC, Dietz WH, Colditz GA. Guidelines for healthy weight. N Engl J Med 1999; 341:427.
21. World Health Organization. Healthy diet. Available at: https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
healthy-diet (Accessed on July 24, 2017).
22. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Cancer prevention recommendations.
Available at: https://www.wcrf.org/dietandcancer/cancer-prevention-recommendations (Accessed on May 12,
2020).
23. Rock CL, Thomson C, Gansler T, et al. American Cancer Society guideline for diet and physical activity for
cancer prevention. CA Cancer J Clin 2020; 70:245.
24. Lichtenstein AH, Khera A, Anderson CAM, et al. 2026 Dietary Guidance to Improve Cardiovascular Health: A
Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2026.
25. US Department of Agriculture. Dietary guidelines for Americans: 2020-2025. US Department of Health and H
uman Services 2020. Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/Dietary_Guid
elines_for_Americans_2020-2025.pdf (Accessed on June 28, 2022).
26. Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2025 to 2030. United States Department of Agriculture and United States D
epartment of Health and Human Services. https://cdn.realfood.gov/DGA.pdf (Accessed on January 13, 2026).
27. Chiuve SE, Fung TT, Rimm EB, et al. Alternative dietary indices both strongly predict risk of chronic disease. J
Nutr 2012; 142:1009.
28. Jankovic N, Geelen A, Streppel MT, et al. Adherence to a healthy diet according to the World Health
Organization guidelines and all-cause mortality in elderly adults from Europe and the United States. Am J
Epidemiol 2014; 180:978.
29. Sotos-Prieto M, Bhupathiraju SN, Mattei J, et al. Association of Changes in Diet Quality with Total and Cause-
Specific Mortality. N Engl J Med 2017; 377:143.
30. Vergnaud AC, Romaguera D, Peeters PH, et al. Adherence to the World Cancer Research Fund/American
Institute for Cancer Research guidelines and risk of death in Europe: results from the European Prospective
Investigation into Nutrition and Cancer cohort study1,4. Am J Clin Nutr 2013; 97:1107.
31. Harmon BE, Boushey CJ, Shvetsov YB, et al. Associations of key diet-quality indexes with mortality in the
Multiethnic Cohort: the Dietary Patterns Methods Project. Am J Clin Nutr 2015; 101:587.
32. Li F, Hou LN, Chen W, et al. Associations of dietary patterns with the risk of all-cause, CVD and stroke
mortality: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Br J Nutr 2015; 113:16.
33. Onvani S, Haghighatdoost F, Surkan PJ, et al. Adherence to the Healthy Eating Index and Alternative Healthy
Eating Index dietary patterns and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular disease and cancer: a meta-
analysis of observational studies. J Hum Nutr Diet 2017; 30:216.
34. Schwingshackl L, Bogensberger B, Hoffmann G. Diet Quality as Assessed by the Healthy Eating Index,
Alternate Healthy Eating Index, Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension Score, and Health Outcomes: An
Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies. J Acad Nutr Diet 2018; 118:74.
35. Thomson CA, Van Horn L, Caan BJ, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality during the intervention and
postintervention periods of the Women's Health Initiative dietary modification trial. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 2014; 23:2924.
36. Tessier AJ, Wang F, Korat AA, et al. Optimal dietary patterns for healthy aging. Nat Med 2025; 31:1644.
37. Johnston BC, Zeraatkar D, Han MA, et al. Unprocessed Red Meat and Processed Meat Consumption: Dietary
Guideline Recommendations From the Nutritional Recommendations (NutriRECS) Consortium. Ann Intern
Med 2019; 171:756.

-- 15 of 40 --

38. Public Health England. The Eatwell Guide. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-eat
well-guide (Accessed on June 28, 2022).
39. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Food-based dietary guidelines - Japan. Available at:
https://www.fao.org/nutrition/education/food-dietary-guidelines/regions/countries/japan/en/ (Accessed on J
une 28, 2022).
40. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, et al. Retraction and Republication: Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular
Disease with a Mediterranean Diet. N Engl J Med 2013;368:1279-90. N Engl J Med 2018; 378:2441.
41. Rees K, Takeda A, Martin N, et al. Mediterranean-style diet for the primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019; 3:CD009825.
42. Delgado-Lista J, Alcala-Diaz JF, Torres-Peña JD, et al. Long-term secondary prevention of cardiovascular
disease with a Mediterranean diet and a low-fat diet (CORDIOPREV): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2022; 399:1876.
43. Karam G, Agarwal A, Sadeghirad B, et al. Comparison of seven popular structured dietary programmes and
risk of mortality and major cardiovascular events in patients at increased cardiovascular risk: systematic
review and network meta-analysis. BMJ 2023; 380:e072003.
44. Maroto-Rodriguez J, Delgado-Velandia M, Ortolá R, et al. Association of a Mediterranean Lifestyle With All-
Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality: A Prospective Study from the UK Biobank. Mayo Clin Proc 2024; 99:551.
45. Schwingshackl L, Hoffmann G. Adherence to Mediterranean diet and risk of cancer: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies. Int J Cancer 2014; 135:1884.
46. Sofi F, Cesari F, Abbate R, et al. Adherence to Mediterranean diet and health status: meta-analysis. BMJ 2008;
337:a1344.
47. Ahmad S, Moorthy MV, Demler OV, et al. Assessment of Risk Factors and Biomarkers Associated With Risk of
Cardiovascular Disease Among Women Consuming a Mediterranean Diet. JAMA Netw Open 2018; 1:e185708.
48. Paterson KE, Myint PK, Jennings A, et al. Mediterranean Diet Reduces Risk of Incident Stroke in a Population
With Varying Cardiovascular Disease Risk Profiles. Stroke 2018; 49:2415.
49. Filomeno M, Bosetti C, Garavello W, et al. The role of a Mediterranean diet on the risk of oral and pharyngeal
cancer. Br J Cancer 2014; 111:981.
50. Castelló A, Pollán M, Buijsse B, et al. Spanish Mediterranean diet and other dietary patterns and breast
cancer risk: case-control EpiGEICAM study. Br J Cancer 2014; 111:1454.
51. Toledo E, Salas-Salvadó J, Donat-Vargas C, et al. Mediterranean Diet and Invasive Breast Cancer Risk Among
Women at High Cardiovascular Risk in the PREDIMED Trial: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Intern Med
2015; 175:1752.
52. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, et al. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure.
DASH Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:1117.
53. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med
2001; 344:3.
54. Rai SK, Fung TT, Lu N, et al. The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, Western diet, and risk
of gout in men: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2017; 357:j1794.
55. Juraschek SP, Gelber AC, Choi HK, et al. Effects of the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) Diet
and Sodium Intake on Serum Uric Acid. Arthritis Rheumatol 2016; 68:3002.
56. Fung TT, Hu FB, Wu K, et al. The Mediterranean and Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diets
and colorectal cancer. Am J Clin Nutr 2010; 92:1429.

-- 16 of 40 --

57. Fung TT, Chiuve SE, McCullough ML, et al. Adherence to a DASH-style diet and risk of coronary heart disease
and stroke in women. Arch Intern Med 2008; 168:713.
58. Salehi-Abargouei A, Maghsoudi Z, Shirani F, Azadbakht L. Effects of Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
(DASH)-style diet on fatal or nonfatal cardiovascular diseases--incidence: a systematic review and meta-
analysis on observational prospective studies. Nutrition 2013; 29:611.
59. Bensaaud A, Seery S, Gibson I, et al. Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) for the primary and
secondary prevention of cardiovascular diseases. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2025; 5:CD013729.
60. US Department of Agriculture. MyPlate: Enjoy vegetarian meals. Available at: https://www.myplate.gov/tip-sh
eet/enjoy-vegetarian-meals (Accessed on June 28, 2022).
61. Leitzmann C. Vegetarian diets: what are the advantages? Forum Nutr 2005; :147.
62. Johnston PK, Sabate J. Nutritional implications of vegetarian diets. In: Modern nutrition in health and disease,
10, Shils ME, Shike M, Ross AC, et al (Eds), Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006. p.1638.
63. Craig WJ. Health effects of vegan diets. Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 89:1627S.
64. Rao V, Al-Weshahy A. Plant-based diets and control of lipids and coronary heart disease risk. Curr Atheroscler
Rep 2008; 10:478.
65. Barnard ND, Katcher HI, Jenkins DJ, et al. Vegetarian and vegan diets in type 2 diabetes management. Nutr
Rev 2009; 67:255.
66. Le LT, Sabaté J. Beyond meatless, the health effects of vegan diets: findings from the Adventist cohorts.
Nutrients 2014; 6:2131.
67. Orlich MJ, Singh PN, Sabaté J, et al. Vegetarian dietary patterns and mortality in Adventist Health Study 2.
JAMA Intern Med 2013; 173:1230.
68. Dinu M, Abbate R, Gensini GF, et al. Vegetarian, vegan diets and multiple health outcomes: A systematic
review with meta-analysis of observational studies. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2017; 57:3640.
69. Kim H, Caulfield LE, Rebholz CM. Healthy Plant-Based Diets Are Associated with Lower Risk of All-Cause
Mortality in US Adults. J Nutr 2018; 148:624.
70. Segovia-Siapco G, Sabaté J. Health and sustainability outcomes of vegetarian dietary patterns: a revisit of the
EPIC-Oxford and the Adventist Health Study-2 cohorts. Eur J Clin Nutr 2019; 72:60.
71. Delgado-Velandia M, Maroto-Rodríguez J, Ortolá R, et al. Plant-Based Diets and All-cause and Cardiovascular
Mortality in a Nationwide Cohort in Spain: The ENRICA Study. Mayo Clin Proc 2022; 97:2005.
72. Zhao B, Gan L, Graubard BI, et al. Plant and Animal Fat Intake and Overall and Cardiovascular Disease
Mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2024; 184:1234.
73. Abris GP, Shavlik DJ, Mathew RO, et al. Cause-specific and all-cause mortalities in vegetarian compared with
those in nonvegetarian participants from the Adventist Health Study-2 cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2024; 120:907.
74. Wang XJ, Steur M, Kavousi M, Voortman T. Adherence to plant-based diets and long-term changes in
cardiometabolic markers: a longitudinal analysis in a population-based cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2025; 122:424.
75. Satija A, Hu FB. Plant-based diets and cardiovascular health. Trends Cardiovasc Med 2018; 28:437.
76. Landry MJ, Ward CP, Cunanan KM, et al. Cardiometabolic Effects of Omnivorous vs Vegan Diets in Identical
Twins: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open 2023; 6:e2344457.
77. Wang T, Kroeger CM, Cassidy S, et al. Vegetarian Dietary Patterns and Cardiometabolic Risk in People With or
at High Risk of Cardiovascular Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open 2023;
6:e2325658.
78. Melina V, Craig W, Levin S. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Vegetarian Diets. J Acad Nutr
Diet 2016; 116:1970.

-- 17 of 40 --

79. Iguacel I, Miguel-Berges ML, Gómez-Bruton A, et al. Veganism, vegetarianism, bone mineral density, and
fracture risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutr Rev 2019; 77:1.
80. Bakaloudi DR, Halloran A, Rippin HL, et al. Intake and adequacy of the vegan diet. A systematic review of the
evidence. Clin Nutr 2021; 40:3503.
81. Howard BV, Van Horn L, Hsia J, et al. Low-fat dietary pattern and risk of cardiovascular disease: the Women's
Health Initiative Randomized Controlled Dietary Modification Trial. JAMA 2006; 295:655.
82. Thomson CA, McCullough ML, Wertheim BC, et al. Nutrition and physical activity cancer prevention
guidelines, cancer risk, and mortality in the women's health initiative. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2014; 7:42.
83. Harcombe Z, Baker JS, DiNicolantonio JJ, et al. Evidence from randomised controlled trials does not support
current dietary fat guidelines: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Open Heart 2016; 3:e000409.
84. Prentice RL, Aragaki AK, Howard BV, et al. Low-Fat Dietary Pattern among Postmenopausal Women
Influences Long-Term Cancer, Cardiovascular Disease, and Diabetes Outcomes. J Nutr 2019; 149:1565.
85. Hooper L, Abdelhamid AS, Jimoh OF, et al. Effects of total fat intake on body fatness in adults. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2020; 6:CD013636.
86. Tobias DK, Chen M, Manson JE, et al. Effect of low-fat diet interventions versus other diet interventions on
long-term weight change in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;
3:968.
87. Ge L, Sadeghirad B, Ball GDC, et al. Comparison of dietary macronutrient patterns of 14 popular named
dietary programmes for weight and cardiovascular risk factor reduction in adults: systematic review and
network meta-analysis of randomised trials. BMJ 2020; 369:m696.
88. Shan Z, Guo Y, Hu FB, et al. Association of Low-Carbohydrate and Low-Fat Diets With Mortality Among US
Adults. JAMA Intern Med 2020; 180:513.
89. Zhong VW, Van Horn L, Cornelis MC, et al. Associations of Dietary Cholesterol or Egg Consumption With
Incident Cardiovascular Disease and Mortality. JAMA 2019; 321:1081.
90. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Rimm EB, et al. A prospective study of egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular
disease in men and women. JAMA 1999; 281:1387.
91. Drouin-Chartier JP, Chen S, Li Y, et al. Egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular disease: three large
prospective US cohort studies, systematic review, and updated meta-analysis. BMJ 2020; 368:m513.
92. Drouin-Chartier JP, Schwab AL, Chen S, et al. Egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: findings from 3
large US cohort studies of men and women and a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort
studies. Am J Clin Nutr 2020; 112:619.
93. Chen GC, Chen LH, Mossavar-Rahmani Y, et al. Dietary cholesterol and egg intake in relation to incident
cardiovascular disease and all-cause and cause-specific mortality in postmenopausal women. Am J Clin Nutr
2021; 113:948.
94. Miller V, Mente A, Dehghan M, et al. Fruit, vegetable, and legume intake, and cardiovascular disease and
deaths in 18 countries (PURE): a prospective cohort study. Lancet 2017; 390:2037.
95. Nagura J, Iso H, Watanabe Y, et al. Fruit, vegetable and bean intake and mortality from cardiovascular
disease among Japanese men and women: the JACC Study. Br J Nutr 2009; 102:285.
96. Sauvaget C, Nagano J, Allen N, Kodama K. Vegetable and fruit intake and stroke mortality in the
Hiroshima/Nagasaki Life Span Study. Stroke 2003; 34:2355.
97. Crowe FL, Roddam AW, Key TJ, et al. Fruit and vegetable intake and mortality from ischaemic heart disease:
results from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC)-Heart study. Eur Heart J
2011; 32:1235.

-- 18 of 40 --

98. Joshipura KJ, Hu FB, Manson JE, et al. The effect of fruit and vegetable intake on risk for coronary heart
disease. Ann Intern Med 2001; 134:1106.
99. Bazzano LA, He J, Ogden LG, et al. Legume consumption and risk of coronary heart disease in US men and
women: NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up Study. Arch Intern Med 2001; 161:2573.
100. Du H, Li L, Bennett D, et al. Fresh Fruit Consumption and Major Cardiovascular Disease in China. N Engl J Med
2016; 374:1332.
101. Diet, nutrition, physical activity and cancer: A global perspective. World Cancer Research Fund, 2018. https://
www.wcrf.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Summary-of-Third-Expert-Report-2018.pdf (Accessed on June 16,
2018).
102. Dagnelie PC, Schuurman AG, Goldbohm RA, Van den Brandt PA. Diet, anthropometric measures and prostate
cancer risk: a review of prospective cohort and intervention studies. BJU Int 2004; 93:1139.
103. Giovannucci E. A review of epidemiologic studies of tomatoes, lycopene, and prostate cancer. Exp Biol Med
(Maywood) 2002; 227:852.
104. Reynolds A, Mann J, Cummings J, et al. Carbohydrate quality and human health: a series of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. Lancet 2019; 393:434.
105. Mozaffarian D, Hao T, Rimm EB, et al. Changes in diet and lifestyle and long-term weight gain in women and
men. N Engl J Med 2011; 364:2392.
106. Tang G, Wang D, Long J, et al. Meta-analysis of the association between whole grain intake and coronary
heart disease risk. Am J Cardiol 2015; 115:625.
107. Wu H, Flint AJ, Qi Q, et al. Association between dietary whole grain intake and risk of mortality: two large
prospective studies in US men and women. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:373.
108. Key TJ, Thorogood M, Appleby PN, Burr ML. Dietary habits and mortality in 11,000 vegetarians and health
conscious people: results of a 17 year follow up. BMJ 1996; 313:775.
109. Ascherio A, Rimm EB, Hernán MA, et al. Intake of potassium, magnesium, calcium, and fiber and risk of
stroke among US men. Circulation 1998; 98:1198.
110. Wolk A, Manson JE, Stampfer MJ, et al. Long-term intake of dietary fiber and decreased risk of coronary heart
disease among women. JAMA 1999; 281:1998.
111. Jensen MK, Koh-Banerjee P, Hu FB, et al. Intakes of whole grains, bran, and germ and the risk of coronary
heart disease in men. Am J Clin Nutr 2004; 80:1492.
112. Park Y, Subar AF, Hollenbeck A, Schatzkin A. Dietary fiber intake and mortality in the NIH-AARP diet and
health study. Arch Intern Med 2011; 171:1061.
113. Chuang SC, Norat T, Murphy N, et al. Fiber intake and total and cause-specific mortality in the European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition cohort. Am J Clin Nutr 2012; 96:164.
114. Kim Y, Je Y. Dietary fiber intake and total mortality: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Am J
Epidemiol 2014; 180:565.
115. Pereira MA, O'Reilly E, Augustsson K, et al. Dietary fiber and risk of coronary heart disease: a pooled analysis
of cohort studies. Arch Intern Med 2004; 164:370.
116. Parra-Soto S, Araya C, Knight K, et al. Different Sources of Fiber Intake and Risk of 17 Specific Cancers and All
Cancers Combined: Prospective Study of 364,856 Participants in the UK Biobank. Am J Epidemiol 2024;
193:660.
117. Ludwig DS, Pereira MA, Kroenke CH, et al. Dietary fiber, weight gain, and cardiovascular disease risk factors
in young adults. JAMA 1999; 282:1539.
118. Hartley L, May MD, Loveman E, et al. Dietary fibre for the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease.

-- 19 of 40 --

Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; :CD011472.
119. Li S, Flint A, Pai JK, et al. Dietary fiber intake and mortality among survivors of myocardial infarction:
prospective cohort study. BMJ 2014; 348:g2659.
120. Elwood PC, Pickering JE, Hughes J, et al. Milk drinking, ischaemic heart disease and ischaemic stroke II.
Evidence from cohort studies. Eur J Clin Nutr 2004; 58:718.
121. German JB, Gibson RA, Krauss RM, et al. A reappraisal of the impact of dairy foods and milk fat on
cardiovascular disease risk. Eur J Nutr 2009; 48:191.
122. Dehghan M, Mente A, Rangarajan S, et al. Association of dairy intake with cardiovascular disease and
mortality in 21 countries from five continents (PURE): a prospective cohort study. Lancet 2018; 392:2288.
123. Akyil S, Winkler S, Meyer D, et al. Association between dairy intake and multiple health outcomes: a scoping
review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Eur J Clin Nutr 2026; 80:16.
124. Guo J, Astrup A, Lovegrove JA, et al. Milk and dairy consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and all-
cause mortality: dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Eur J Epidemiol 2017; 32:269.
125. Schwingshackl L, Schwedhelm C, Hoffmann G, et al. Food Groups and Risk of Hypertension: A Systematic
Review and Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies. Adv Nutr 2017; 8:793.
126. Heymsfield SB, Shapses SA. Guidance on Energy and Macronutrients across the Life Span. N Engl J Med 2024;
390:1299.
127. Guasch-Ferré M, Liu X, Malik VS, et al. Nut Consumption and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease. J Am Coll Cardiol
2017; 70:2519.
128. Advice about Eating Fish For Those Who Might Become or Are Pregnant or Breastfeeding and Children Ages
1 - 11 Years https://www.fda.gov/food/consumers/advice-about-eating-fish (Accessed on June 28, 2022).
129. Leung Yinko SS, Stark KD, Thanassoulis G, Pilote L. Fish consumption and acute coronary syndrome: a meta-
analysis. Am J Med 2014; 127:848.
130. Mohan D, Mente A, Dehghan M, et al. Associations of Fish Consumption With Risk of Cardiovascular Disease
and Mortality Among Individuals With or Without Vascular Disease From 58 Countries. JAMA Intern Med
2021; 181:631.
131. Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JHY, et al. Dietary Fats and Cardiovascular Disease: A Presidential Advisory
From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2017; 136:e1.
132. Hu FB, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, et al. Dietary fat intake and the risk of coronary heart disease in women. N
Engl J Med 1997; 337:1491.
133. Mozaffarian D, Micha R, Wallace S. Effects on coronary heart disease of increasing polyunsaturated fat in
place of saturated fat: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS Med 2010;
7:e1000252.
134. Zhang Y, Chadaideh KS, Li Y, et al. Butter and Plant-Based Oils Intake and Mortality. JAMA Intern Med 2025;
185:549.
135. Hu T, Mills KT, Yao L, et al. Effects of low-carbohydrate diets versus low-fat diets on metabolic risk factors: a
meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Am J Epidemiol 2012; 176 Suppl 7:S44.
136. Mansoor N, Vinknes KJ, Veierød MB, Retterstøl K. Effects of low-carbohydrate diets v. low-fat diets on body
weight and cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Br J Nutr 2016;
115:466.
137. Fung TT, van Dam RM, Hankinson SE, et al. Low-carbohydrate diets and all-cause and cause-specific
mortality: two cohort studies. Ann Intern Med 2010; 153:289.
138. Seidelmann SB, Claggett B, Cheng S, et al. Dietary carbohydrate intake and mortality: a prospective cohort
study and meta-analysis. Lancet Public Health 2018; 3:e419.

-- 20 of 40 --

139. US Department of Agriculture. Organic regulations. Available at: https://www.ams.usda.gov/rules-regulation
s/organic (Accessed on February 15, 2019).
140. Brantsæter AL, Ydersbond TA, Hoppin JA, et al. Organic Food in the Diet: Exposure and Health Implications.
Annu Rev Public Health 2017; 38:295.
141. Smith-Spangler C, Brandeau ML, Hunter GE, et al. Are organic foods safer or healthier than conventional
alternatives?: a systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2012; 157:348.
142. Bradbury KE, Balkwill A, Spencer EA, et al. Organic food consumption and the incidence of cancer in a large
prospective study of women in the United Kingdom. Br J Cancer 2014; 110:2321.
143. Baudry J, Assmann KE, Touvier M, et al. Association of Frequency of Organic Food Consumption With Cancer
Risk: Findings From the NutriNet-Santé Prospective Cohort Study. JAMA Intern Med 2018; 178:1597.
144. Phillips CM, Chen LW, Heude B, et al. Dietary Inflammatory Index and Non-Communicable Disease Risk: A
Narrative Review. Nutrients 2019; 11.
145. Shivappa N, Hebert JR, Kivimaki M, Akbaraly T. Alternative Healthy Eating Index 2010, Dietary Inflammatory
Index and risk of mortality: results from the Whitehall II cohort study and meta-analysis of previous Dietary
Inflammatory Index and mortality studies. Br J Nutr 2017; 118:210.
146. Park SY, Kang M, Wilkens LR, et al. The Dietary Inflammatory Index and All-Cause, Cardiovascular Disease,
and Cancer Mortality in the Multiethnic Cohort Study. Nutrients 2018; 10.
147. Lebwohl B, Cao Y, Zong G, et al. Long term gluten consumption in adults without celiac disease and risk of
coronary heart disease: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2017; 357:j1892.
148. GBD 2016 Alcohol Collaborators. Alcohol use and burden for 195 countries and territories, 1990-2016: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet 2018; 392:1015.
149. Steen JP, Klatt KC, Chang Y, et al. Effect of Interventions Aimed at Reducing or Modifying Saturated Fat Intake
on Cholesterol, Mortality, and Major Cardiovascular Events : A Risk Stratified Systematic Review of
Randomized Trials. Ann Intern Med 2026; 179:242.
150. McCarthy M. US gives food manufacturers three years to ban trans fats. BMJ 2015; 350:h3315.
151. Warraich HJ, Carroll L, McKinnon RA, et al. U.S. Food and Drug Administration Updates in Nutrition Labeling:
What Clinicians Need to Know. Ann Intern Med 2024; 177:532.
152. Imamura F, O'Connor L, Ye Z, et al. Consumption of sugar sweetened beverages, artificially sweetened
beverages, and fruit juice and incidence of type 2 diabetes: systematic review, meta-analysis, and estimation
of population attributable fraction. BMJ 2015; 351:h3576.
153. Jayalath VH, de Souza RJ, Ha V, et al. Sugar-sweetened beverage consumption and incident hypertension: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohorts. Am J Clin Nutr 2015; 102:914.
154. Xi B, Huang Y, Reilly KH, et al. Sugar-sweetened beverages and risk of hypertension and CVD: a dose-
response meta-analysis. Br J Nutr 2015; 113:709.
155. Huang Y, Chen Z, Chen B, et al. Dietary sugar consumption and health: umbrella review. BMJ 2023;
381:e071609.
156. Malik VS, Li Y, Pan A, et al. Long-Term Consumption of Sugar-Sweetened and Artificially Sweetened
Beverages and Risk of Mortality in US Adults. Circulation 2019; 139:2113.
157. Li H, Liang H, Yang H, et al. Association between intake of sweetened beverages with all-cause and cause-
specific mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Public Health (Oxf) 2022; 44:516.
158. Rodríguez-Ayala M, Donat-Vargas C, Moreno-Franco B, et al. Association of a healthy beverage score with
total mortality in the adult population of Spain: A nationwide cohort study. PLoS Med 2024; 21:e1004337.
159. Lara-Castor L, O'Hearn M, Cudhea F, et al. Burdens of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease attributable

-- 21 of 40 --

to sugar-sweetened beverages in 184 countries. Nat Med 2025; 31:552.
160. Use of non-sugar sweeteners: WHO guideline. World Health Organization, May 15, 2023. https://www.who.in
t/publications/i/item/9789240073616 (Accessed on October 06, 2023).
161. Suran M. Sugar Substitutes Don't Help Weight Control and May Increase Risk of Heart Disease and Diabetes,
WHO Warns. JAMA 2023; 330:9.
162. Wolk A. Potential health hazards of eating red meat. J Intern Med 2017; 281:106.
163. Orlich MJ, Sabaté J, Mashchak A, et al. Ultra-processed food intake and animal-based food intake and
mortality in the Adventist Health Study-2. Am J Clin Nutr 2022; 115:1589.
164. Feskens EJ, Sluik D, van Woudenbergh GJ. Meat consumption, diabetes, and its complications. Curr Diab Rep
2013; 13:298.
165. Kaluza J, Wolk A, Larsson SC. Red meat consumption and risk of stroke: a meta-analysis of prospective
studies. Stroke 2012; 43:2556.
166. Chan DS, Lau R, Aune D, et al. Red and processed meat and colorectal cancer incidence: meta-analysis of
prospective studies. PLoS One 2011; 6:e20456.
167. Dankner R, Chetrit A, Avraham SB, et al. A historical cohort study with 27,754 individuals on the association
between meat consumption and gastrointestinal tract and colorectal cancer incidence. Int J Cancer 2024;
155:2009.
168. Farvid MS, Sidahmed E, Spence ND, et al. Consumption of red meat and processed meat and cancer
incidence: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. Eur J Epidemiol 2021; 36:937.
169. Abete I, Romaguera D, Vieira AR, et al. Association between total, processed, red and white meat
consumption and all-cause, CVD and IHD mortality: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Br J Nutr 2014;
112:762.
170. Larsson SC, Orsini N. Red meat and processed meat consumption and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis.
Am J Epidemiol 2014; 179:282.
171. Wang X, Lin X, Ouyang YY, et al. Red and processed meat consumption and mortality: dose-response meta-
analysis of prospective cohort studies. Public Health Nutr 2016; 19:893.
172. Zeraatkar D, Johnston BC, Bartoszko J, et al. Effect of Lower Versus Higher Red Meat Intake on
Cardiometabolic and Cancer Outcomes: A Systematic Review of Randomized Trials. Ann Intern Med 2019;
171:721.
173. Zeraatkar D, Han MA, Guyatt GH, et al. Red and Processed Meat Consumption and Risk for All-Cause
Mortality and Cardiometabolic Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Cohort Studies. Ann
Intern Med 2019; 171:703.
174. Vernooij RWM, Zeraatkar D, Han MA, et al. Patterns of Red and Processed Meat Consumption and Risk for
Cardiometabolic and Cancer Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Cohort Studies. Ann Intern
Med 2019; 171:732.
175. Han MA, Zeraatkar D, Guyatt GH, et al. Reduction of Red and Processed Meat Intake and Cancer Mortality
and Incidence: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of Cohort Studies. Ann Intern Med 2019; 171:711.
176. Iqbal R, Dehghan M, Mente A, et al. Associations of unprocessed and processed meat intake with mortality
and cardiovascular disease in 21 countries [Prospective Urban Rural Epidemiology (PURE) Study]: a
prospective cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr 2021; 114:1049.
177. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation 2019; 140:e596.

-- 22 of 40 --

178. Bouvard V, Loomis D, Guyton KZ, et al. Carcinogenicity of consumption of red and processed meat. Lancet
Oncol 2015; 16:1599.
179. Fiolet T, Srour B, Sellem L, et al. Consumption of ultra-processed foods and cancer risk: results from NutriNet-
Santé prospective cohort. BMJ 2018; 360:k322.
180. Schnabel L, Kesse-Guyot E, Allès B, et al. Association Between Ultraprocessed Food Consumption and Risk of
Mortality Among Middle-aged Adults in France. JAMA Intern Med 2019; 179:490.
181. Srour B, Fezeu LK, Kesse-Guyot E, et al. Ultraprocessed Food Consumption and Risk of Type 2 Diabetes
Among Participants of the NutriNet-Santé Prospective Cohort. JAMA Intern Med 2020; 180:283.
182. Srour B, Fezeu LK, Kesse-Guyot E, et al. Ultra-processed food intake and risk of cardiovascular disease:
prospective cohort study (NutriNet-Santé). BMJ 2019; 365:l1451.
183. Sherling DH, Hennekens CH, Ferris AH. Newest Updates to Health Providers on the Hazards of Ultra-
Processed Foods and Proposed Solutions. Am J Med 2024; 137:395.
184. Meine GC, Picon RV, Espírito Santo PA, Sander GB. Ultra-Processed Food Consumption and Gastrointestinal
Cancer Risk: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2024; 119:1056.
185. Feinberg A, Rebholz CM, Lemaitre RN, et al. Ultra-processed foods, plant and animal sources, and all-cause,
cardiovascular, and cancer mortality in older adults in the United States: results from the Cardiovascular
Health Study. Am J Clin Nutr 2025; 122:523.
186. Hatta-Langedyk J, Wang L, Fan B, et al. Ultraprocessed Food Versus Diet Quality in Relation to
Cardiometabolic Health and All-Cause Mortality: NHANES 1999-2018. Am J Public Health 2026; 116:1015.
187. Nguyen TA, Nguyen NN, Nguyen HS, et al. Ultraprocessed food consumption and the global burden of
noncommunicable disease: a 45-country comparative risk assessment. Am J Clin Nutr 2026; 124:101417.
188. Barbaresko J, Bröder J, Conrad J, et al. Ultra-processed food consumption and human health: an umbrella
review of systematic reviews with meta-analyses. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 2025; 65:1999.
189. Lane MM, Gamage E, Du S, et al. Ultra-processed food exposure and adverse health outcomes: umbrella
review of epidemiological meta-analyses. BMJ 2024; 384:e077310.
190. Bagnardi V, Rota M, Botteri E, et al. Light alcohol drinking and cancer: a meta-analysis. Ann Oncol 2013;
24:301.
191. Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, et al. Alcohol consumption and mortality among middle-aged and elderly U.S.
adults. N Engl J Med 1997; 337:1705.
Topic 5364 Version 103.0

-- 23 of 40 --

GRAPHICS
Table 1: Estimated caloric needs per day, by age, sex, and physical activity level
Males 	Females
Age 	Sedentary* 	Moderately
active
Active 	Age 	Sedentary* 	Moderately
active
Active
2 	1000 	1000 	1000 	2 	1000 	1000 	1000
3 	1000 	1400 	1400 	3 	1000 	1200 	1400
4 	1200 	1400 	1600 	4 	1200 	1400 	1400
5 	1200 	1400 	1600 	5 	1200 	1400 	1600
6 	1400 	1600 	1800 	6 	1200 	1400 	1600
7 	1400 	1600 	1800 	7 	1200 	1600 	1800
8 	1400 	1600 	2000 	8 	1400 	1600 	1800
9 	1600 	1800 	2000 	9 	1400 	1600 	1800
10 	1600 	1800 	2200 	10 	1400 	1800 	2000
11 	1800 	2000 	2200 	11 	1600 	1800 	2000
12 	1800 	2200 	2400 	12 	1600 	2000 	2200
13 	2000 	2200 	2600 	13 	1600 	2000 	2200
14 	2000 	2400 	2800 	14 	1800 	2000 	2400
15 	2200 	2600 	3000 	15 	1800 	2000 	2400
16 	2400 	2800 	3200 	16 	1800 	2000 	2400
17 	2400 	2800 	3200 	17 	1800 	2000 	2400
18 	2400 	2800 	3200 	18 	1800 	2000 	2400
19 to 20 	2600 	2800 	3000 	19 to 20 	2000 	2200 	2400
21 to 25 	2400 	2800 	3000 	21 to 25 	2000 	2200 	2400
26 to 30 	2400 	2600 	3000 	26 to 30 	1800 	2000 	2400
31 to 35 	2400 	2600 	3000 	31 to 35 	1800 	2000 	2200
36 to 40 	2400 	2600 	2800 	36 to 40 	1800 	2000 	2200
41 to 45 	2200 	2600 	2800 	41 to 45 	1800 	2000 	2200
46 to 50 	2200 	2400 	2800 	46 to 50 	1800 	2000 	2200
51 to 55 	2200 	2400 	2800 	51 to 55 	1600 	1800 	2200
56 to 60 	2200 	2400 	2600 	56 to 60 	1600 	1800 	2200
61 to 65 	2000 	2400 	2600 	61 to 65 	1600 	1800 	2000
66 to 70 	2000 	2200 	2600 	66 to 70 	1600 	1800 	2000
71 to 75 	2000 	2200 	2600 	71 to 75 	1600 	1800 	2000
76 and up 	2000 	2200 	2400 	76 and up 	1600 	1800 	2000
* Sedentary means a lifestyle that includes only the physical activity of independent living.
¶ Moderately active means a lifestyle that includes physical activity equivalent to walking about 1.5 to 3 miles per day at 3 to
4 miles per hour, in addition to the activities of independent living.
Δ Active means a lifestyle that includes physical activity equivalent to walking more than 3 miles per day at 3 to 4 miles per
hour, in addition to the activities of independent living.
◊
¶
Δ
¶
Δ

-- 24 of 40 --

◊ Estimates for females do not include women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Reproduced from: US Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans: 2020–2025, 9th
ed, December 2020. Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/ (Accessed on June 23, 2022).
Graphic 107834 Version 5.0

-- 25 of 40 --

Table 2: Healthy Mediterranean-style dietary pattern for children and adults
CALORIE LEVEL OF PATTERN* 	1000 	1200 	1400 	1600 	1800 	2000 	2200 	2400 	2600 	2800 	3000 	3200
FOOD GROUP OR SUBGROUP 	Daily amount of food from each group
(vegetable and protein foods subgroup amounts are per week)
Vegetables
(cup eq/day)
1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	4
Vegetable subgroups in weekly amounts
Dark-green vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Red and orange vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2½ 	3 	3 	4 	5½ 	5½ 	6 	6 	7 	7 	7½ 	7½
Beans, peas, lentils
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	½ 	½ 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3
Starchy vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	5 	5 	6 	6 	7 	7 	8 	8
Other vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
1½ 	2½ 	2½ 	3½ 	4 	4 	5 	5 	5½ 	5½ 	7 	7
Fruits
(cup eq/day)
1 	1 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3
Grains
(ounce eq/day)
3 	4 	5 	5 	6 	6 	7 	8 	9 	10 	10 	10
Whole grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3 	3 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5 	5
Refined grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	2 	3 	3 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5 	5
Dairy
(cup eq/day)
2 	2½ 	2½ 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Protein foods
(ounce eq/day)
2 	3 	4 	5½ 	6 	6½ 	7 	7½ 	7½ 	8 	8 	8
Protein foods subgroups in weekly amounts
Meats, poultry, eggs
(ounce eq/wk)
10 	14 	19 	23 	23 	26 	28 	31 	31 	33 	33 	33
Seafood
(ounce eq/wk)
3 	4 	6 	11 	15 	15 	16 	16 	17 	17 	17 	17
Nuts, seeds, soy products
(ounce eq/wk)
2 	2 	3 	4 	4 	5 	5 	5 	5 	6 	6 	6
Oils
(grams/day)
15 	17 	17 	22 	24 	27 	29 	31 	34 	36 	44 	51
Limit on calories for other
uses
(kcal/day)
130 	80 	90 	120 	140 	240 	250 	280 	300 	330 	400 	540
Limit on calories for other
uses
(%/day)
13% 	7% 	6% 	8% 	8% 	12% 	11% 	12% 	12% 	12% 	13% 	17%
¶
Δ
Δ
◊
§

-- 26 of 40 --

The total dietary pattern should not exceed Dietary Guidelines limits for added sugars, saturated fat, and alcohol; be within
the Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges for protein, carbohydrate, and total fats; and stay within calorie limits.
Values are rounded.
* Patterns at 1000, 1200, and 1400 kcal levels are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children ages 2 through 8 years.
Patterns from 1600 to 3200 kcal are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children 9 years and older and adults. If a
child 4 through 8 years of age needs more energy and, therefore, is following a pattern at 1600 calories or more, their
recommended amount from the dairy group should be 2½ cup eq per day. Amount of dairy for children ages 9 through 18 is
3 cup eq per day regardless of calorie level. The 1000 and 1200 kcal level patterns are not intended for children 9 and older
or adults. The 1400 kcal level is not intended for children ages 10 and older or adults.
¶ Food group amounts shown in cup equivalents (cup eq) or ounce equivalents (ounce eq). Oils are shown in grams.
Quantity equivalents for each food group are: Vegetables, fruits (1 cup eq): 1 cup raw or cooked vegetable or fruit; 1 cup
vegetable or fruit juice; 2 cups leafy salad greens; ½ cup dried fruit or vegetable. Grains (1 ounce eq): ½ cup cooked rice,
pasta, or cereal; 1 ounce dry pasta or rice; 1 medium (1 ounce) slice bread, tortilla, or flatbread; 1 ounce of ready-to-eat
cereal (about 1 cup of flaked cereal). Dairy (1 cup eq): 1 cup milk, yogurt, or fortified soymilk; 1½ ounces natural cheese such
as cheddar cheese or 2 ounces of processed cheese. Protein foods (1 ounce eq): 1 ounce lean meats, poultry, or seafood; 1
egg; ¼ cup cooked beans or tofu; 1 tbsp nut or seed butter; ½ ounce nuts or seeds.
Δ Amounts of dairy recommended for children and adolescents are as follows, regardless of the calorie level of the pattern:
for age 2 years, 2 cup eq per day; for ages 3 through 8 years, 2½ cup eq per day; for ages 9 through 18 years, 3 cup eq per
day.
◊ The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provide joint advice
regarding seafood consumption to limit methylmercury exposure for women who might become or are pregnant or
lactating, and children. Depending on body weight, some women and children should choose seafood lowest in
methylmercury or eat less seafood than the amounts in the healthy US-style dietary Pattern. For more information, see the
FDA and EPA websites.
§ Foods are assumed to be in nutrient-dense forms; lean or low-fat; and prepared with minimal added sugars, refined
starches (which are a source of calories but few or no other nutrients), saturated fat, or sodium. If all food choices to meet
food group recommendations are in nutrient-dense forms, a small number of calories remain within the overall limit of the
pattern (ie, limit on calories for other uses). The amount of calories depends on the total calorie level of the pattern and the
amounts of food from each food group required to meet nutritional goals. Calories up to the specified limit can be used for
added sugars, saturated fat, and/or alcohol (for nonpregnant adults of legal drinking age only) or to eat more than the
recommended amount of food in a food group.
Adapted from: Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services 2020.
Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/2020-2025-dietary-guidelines-online-materials (Accessed on June 23, 2022).
Graphic 138997 Version 1.0

-- 27 of 40 --

Table 3: Healthy vegetarian dietary pattern for children and adults
CALORIE LEVEL OF PATTERN 	1000 	1200 	1400 	1600 	1800 	2000 	2200 	2400 	2600 	2800 	3000 	3200
FOOD GROUP OR SUBGROUP 	Daily amount of food from each group
(vegetable and protein foods subgroup amounts are per week)
Vegetables
(cup eq/day)
1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	4
Vegetable subgroups in weekly amounts
Dark-green vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Red and orange vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2½ 	3 	3 	4 	5½ 	5½ 	6 	6 	7 	7 	7½ 	7½
Beans, peas, lentils
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	½ 	½ 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3
Starchy vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	5 	5 	6 	6 	7 	7 	8 	8
Other vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
1½ 	2½ 	2½ 	3½ 	4 	4 	5 	5 	5½ 	5½ 	7 	7
Fruits
(cup eq/day)
1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Grains
(ounce eq/day)
3 	4 	5 	5½ 	6½ 	6½ 	7½ 	8½ 	9½ 	10½ 	10½ 	10½
Whole grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5½ 	5½ 	5½
Refined grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5 	5
Dairy
(cup eq/day)
2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3
Protein foods
(ounce eq/day)
1 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5½ 	6
Protein foods subgroups in weekly amounts
Eggs
(ounce eq/wk)
2 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	4 	4 	4
Beans, peas, lentils
(ounce eq/wk)
1 	2 	4 	4 	6 	6 	6 	8 	9 	10 	11 	12
Soy products
(ounce eq/wk)
2 	3 	4 	6 	6 	8 	8 	9 	10 	11 	12 	13
Nuts, seeds
(ounce eq/wk)
2 	2 	3 	5 	6 	7 	7 	8 	9 	10 	12 	13
Oils
(grams/day)
15 	17 	17 	22 	24 	27 	29 	31 	34 	36 	44 	51
Limit on calories for other
uses
(kcal/day)
170 	140 	160 	150 	150 	250 	290 	350 	350 	350 	390 	500
*
¶
Δ
Δ
◊

-- 28 of 40 --

Limit on calories for other
uses
(%/day)
17% 	12% 	11% 	9% 	8% 	13% 	13% 	15% 	13% 	13% 	13% 	16%
Intake should not exceed Dietary Guidelines limits for added sugars, saturated fat, and alcohol; and should be within the
Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges for protein, carbohydrate, and total fats; and stay within calorie limits. Values
are rounded.
* Patterns at 1000, 1200, and 1400 kcal levels are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children ages 2 through 8 years.
Patterns from 1600 to 3200 kcal are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children 9 years and older and adults. If a
child 4 through 8 years of age needs more energy and, therefore, is following a pattern at 1600 calories or more, their
recommended amount from the dairy group should be 2½ cup eq per day. Amount of dairy for children ages 9 through 18 is
3 cup eq per day regardless of calorie level. The 1000 and 1200 kcal level patterns are not intended for children 9 and older
or adults. The 1400 kcal level is not intended for children ages 10 and older or adults.
¶ Food group amounts shown in cup equivalents (cup eq) or ounce equivalents (ounce eq). Oils are shown in grams.
Quantity equivalents for each food group are: Vegetables, fruits (1 cup eq): 1 cup raw or cooked vegetable or fruit; 1 cup
vegetable or fruit juice; 2 cups leafy salad greens; ½ cup dried fruit or vegetable. Grains (1 ounce eq): ½ cup cooked rice,
pasta, or cereal; 1 ounce dry pasta or rice; 1 medium (1 ounce) slice bread, tortilla, or flatbread; 1 ounce of ready-to-eat
cereal (about 1 cup of flaked cereal). Dairy (1 cup eq): 1 cup milk, yogurt, or fortified soymilk; 1½ ounces natural cheese such
as cheddar cheese or 2 ounces of processed cheese. Protein foods (1 ounce eq): 1 ounce lean meats, poultry, or seafood; 1
egg; ¼ cup cooked beans or tofu; 1 tbsp nut or seed butter; ½ ounce nuts or seeds.
Δ About half of beans, peas, lentils are shown as vegetables, in cup eq, and half as protein foods, in ounce eq. Beans, peas,
lentils in the patterns, in cup eq, is the amount in the vegetable group plus the amount in protein foods group (in ounce eq)
divided by 4.
◊ Foods are assumed to be in nutrient-dense forms, lean or low-fat and prepared with minimal added saturated fat, added
sugars, refined starches, or salt. If all food choices to meet food group recommendations are in nutrient-dense forms, a
small number of calories remain within the overall limit of the pattern (ie, limit on calories for other uses). The amount of
calories depends on the total calorie level of the pattern and the amounts of food from each food group required to meet
nutritional goals. Calories up to the specified limit can be used for added sugars, added refined starches, saturated fat,
alcohol, or to eat more than the recommended amount of food in a food group.
Adapted from: Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services 2020.
Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/2020-2025-dietary-guidelines-online-materials (Accessed on June 23, 2022).
Graphic 138996 Version 3.0

-- 29 of 40 --

Table 4: Healthy US-style dietary pattern for children and adults
CALORIE LEVEL OF PATTERN* 	1000 	1200 	1400 	1600 	1800 	2000 	2200 	2400 	2600 	2800 	3000 	3200
FOOD GROUP OR SUBGROUP 	Daily amount of food from each group
(vegetable and protein foods subgroup amounts are per week)
Vegetables
(cup eq/day)
1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	4
Vegetable subgroups in weekly amounts
Dark-green vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Red and orange vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2½ 	3 	3 	4 	5½ 	5½ 	6 	6 	7 	7 	7½ 	7½
Beans, peas, lentils
(cup eq/wk)
½ 	½ 	½ 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3
Starchy vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
2 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	5 	5 	6 	6 	7 	7 	8 	8
Other vegetables
(cup eq/wk)
1½ 	2½ 	2½ 	3½ 	4 	4 	5 	5 	5½ 	5½ 	7 	7
Fruits
(cup eq/day)
1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½ 	2 	2 	2 	2 	2½ 	2½ 	2½
Grains
(ounce eq/day)
3 	4 	5 	5 	6 	6 	7 	8 	9 	10 	10 	10
Whole grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3 	3 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5 	5
Refined grains
(ounce eq/day)
1½ 	2 	2½ 	2 	3 	3 	3½ 	4 	4½ 	5 	5 	5
Dairy
(cup eq/day)
2 	2½ 	2½ 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3 	3
Protein foods
(ounce eq/day)
2 	3 	4 	5 	5 	5½ 	6 	6½ 	6½ 	7 	7 	7
Protein foods subgroups in weekly amounts
Meats, poultry, eggs
(ounce eq/wk)
10 	14 	19 	23 	23 	26 	28 	31 	31 	33 	33 	33
Seafood
(ounce eq/wk)
2-3 	4 	6 	8 	8 	8 	9 	10 	10 	10 	10 	10
Nuts, seeds, soy products
(ounce eq/wk)
2 	2 	3 	4 	4 	5 	5 	5 	5 	6 	6 	6
Oils
(grams/day)
15 	17 	17 	22 	24 	27 	29 	31 	34 	36 	44 	51
Limit on calories for other
uses
(kcal/day)
130 	80 	90 	100 	140 	240 	250 	320 	350 	370 	440 	580
Limit on calories for other
uses
(%/day)
13% 	7% 	6% 	6% 	8% 	12% 	11% 	13% 	13% 	13% 	15% 	18%
¶
Δ
◊
§
¥

-- 30 of 40 --

The total dietary pattern should not exceed Dietary Guidelines limits for added sugars, saturated fat, and alcohol; be within
the Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges for protein, carbohydrate, and total fats; and stay within calorie limits.
Values are rounded.
* Patterns at 1000, 1200, and 1400 kcal levels are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children ages 2 through 8 years.
Patterns from 1600 to 3200 kcal are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children 9 years and older and adults. If a
child 4 through 8 years of age needs more energy and, therefore, is following a pattern at 1600 calories or more, their
recommended amount from the dairy group should be 2½ cup eq per day. Amount of dairy for children ages 9 through 18 is
3 cup eq per day regardless of calorie level. The 1000 and 1200 kcal level patterns are not intended for children 9 and older
or adults. The 1400 kcal level is not intended for children ages 10 and older or adults.
¶ Food group amounts shown in cup equivalents (cup eq) or ounce equivalents (ounce eq). Oils are shown in grams.
Quantity equivalents for each food group are: Vegetables, fruits (1 cup eq): 1 cup raw or cooked vegetable or fruit; 1 cup
vegetable or fruit juice; 2 cups leafy salad greens; ½ cup dried fruit or vegetable. Grains (1 ounce eq): ½ cup cooked rice,
pasta, or cereal; 1 ounce dry pasta or rice; 1 medium (1 ounce) slice bread, tortilla, or flatbread; 1 ounce of ready-to-eat
cereal (about 1 cup of flaked cereal). Dairy (1 cup eq): 1 cup milk, yogurt, or fortified soymilk; 1½ ounces natural cheese such
as cheddar cheese or 2 ounces of processed cheese. Protein foods (1 ounce eq): 1 ounce lean meats, poultry, or seafood; 1
egg; ¼ cup cooked beans or tofu; 1 tbsp nut or seed butter; ½ ounce nuts or seeds.
Δ Amounts of whole grains in patterns for children are less than the minimum of 3 ounce-eq in all patterns recommended
for adults.
◊ The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provide joint advice
regarding seafood consumption to limit methylmercury exposure for women who might become or are pregnant or
breastfeeding, and children. Depending on body weight, some women and many children should choose seafood lowest in
methylmercury or eat less seafood than the amounts in the healthy US-style eating pattern. For more information, see the
FDA and EPA websites.
§ If consuming up to 2 ounces of seafood per week, children should only be fed cooked varieties from the "Best Choices" list
in the FDA/EPA joint "Advice About Eating Fish," available on both websites. If consuming up to 3 ounces of seafood per
week, children should only be fed cooked varieties from the "Best Choices" list that contain even lower methylmercury:
flatfish (eg, flounder), salmon, tilapia, shrimp, catfish, crab, trout, haddock, oysters, sardines, squid, pollock, anchovies,
crawfish, mullet, scallops, whiting, clams, shad, and Atlantic mackerel. If consuming up to 3 ounces of seafood per week,
many commonly consumed varieties of seafood should be avoided because they cannot be consumed at 3 ounces per week
by children without the potential of exceeding safe methylmercury limits; examples that should not be consumed include:
canned light tuna or white (albacore) tuna, cod, perch, black sea bass.
¥ Foods are assumed to be in nutrient-dense forms, lean or low-fat and prepared with minimal added saturated fat, added
sugars, refined starches, or salt. If all food choices to meet food group recommendations are in nutrient-dense forms, a
small number of calories remain within the overall limit of the pattern (ie, limit on calories for other uses). The amount of
calories depends on the total calorie level of the pattern and the amounts of food from each food group required to meet
nutritional goals. Calories up to the specified limit can be used for added sugars, added refined starches, saturated fat,
alcohol, or to eat more than the recommended amount of food in a food group.
Adapted from: Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services 2020.
Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/2020-2025-dietary-guidelines-online-materials (Accessed on June 23, 2022).
Graphic 138995 Version 1.0

-- 31 of 40 --

Table 5: USDA recommended daily or weekly caloric intake of different food groups (USDA
recommended average daily food intake)
Calorie level of pattern 	1000 	1200 	1400 	1600 	1800 	2000
Food group 	Daily amount of food from each group (vegetable and protein foods
subgroup amounts are per week)
Vegetables 	1 c-eq 	1½ c-eq 	1½ c-eq 	2 c-eq 	2½ c-eq 	2½ c-eq
Dark-green vegetables (c-eq/week) 	½ 	1 	1 	1½ 	1½ 	1½
Red and orange vegetables (c-eq/week) 	2½ 	3 	3 	4 	5½ 	5½
Legumes (beans and peas) (c-eq/week) 	½ 	½ 	½ 	1 	1½ 	1½
Starchy vegetables (c-eq/week) 	2 	3½ 	3½ 	4 	5 	5
Other vegetables (c-eq/week) 	1½ 	2½ 	2½ 	3½ 	4 	4
Fruits 	1 c-eq 	1 c-eq 	1½ c-eq 	1½ c-eq 	1½ c-eq 	2 c-eq
Grains 	3 oz-eq 	4 oz-eq 	5 oz-eq 	5 oz-eq 	6 oz-eq 	6 oz-eq
Whole grains (oz-eq/day) 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	3 	3 	3
Refined grains (oz-eq/day) 	1½ 	2 	2½ 	2 	3 	3
Dairy 	2 c-eq 	2½ c-eq 	2½ c-eq 	3 c-eq 	3 c-eq 	3 c-eq
Protein foods 	2 oz-eq 	3 oz-eq 	4 oz-eq 	5 oz-eq 	5 oz-eq 	5½ oz-eq
Seafood (oz-eq/week) 	3 	4 	6 	8 	8 	8
Meats, poultry, eggs (oz-eq/week) 	10 	14 	19 	23 	23 	26
Nuts seeds, soy products (oz-eq/week) 	2 	2 	3 	4 	4 	5
Oils 	15 g 	17 g 	17 g 	22 g 	24 g 	27 g
Limit on calories for other uses, calories (% of
calories)
150 (15%) 	100 (8%) 	110 (8%) 	130 (8%) 	170 (9%) 	270 (14%)
USDA: United States Department of Agriculture.
* Food intake patterns at 1000, 1200, and 1400 calories are designed to meet the nutritional needs of 2- to 8-year-old
children. Patterns from 1600 to 3200 calories are designed to meet the nutritional needs of children 9 years and older as well
as adults. If a child 4 to 8 years of age needs more calories and, therefore, is following a pattern at 1600 calories or more,
their recommended amount from the dairy group should be 2.5 cups per day. Children 9 years and older and adults should
not use the 1000-, 1200-, or 1400-calorie patterns.
¶ Foods in each group and subgroup are:
Vegetables
Dark-green vegetables: All fresh, frozen, and canned dark-green leafy vegetables and broccoli, cooked or raw: for
example, broccoli, spinach, romaine, kale, collard, turnip, and mustard greens.
Red and orange vegetables: All fresh, frozen, and canned red and orange vegetables or juice, cooked or raw: for
example, tomatoes, tomato juice, red peppers, carrots, sweet potatoes, winter squash, and pumpkin.
Legumes (beans and peas): All cooked from dry or canned beans and peas: for example, kidney beans, white
beans, black beans, lentils, chickpeas, pinto beans, split peas, and edamame (green soybeans). Does not include
green beans or green peas.
Starchy vegetables: All fresh, frozen, and canned starchy vegetables: for example, white potatoes, corn, green
peas, green lima beans, plantains, and cassava.
Other vegetables: All other fresh, frozen, and canned vegetables, cooked or raw: for example, iceberg lettuce,
green beans, onions, cucumbers, cabbage, celery, zucchini, mushrooms, and green peppers.
Fruits
All fresh, frozen, canned, and dried fruits and fruit juices: for example, oranges and orange juice, apples and apple
juice, bananas, grapes, melons, berries, and raisins.
Grains
Whole grains: All whole-grain products and whole grains used as ingredients: for example, whole-wheat bread,
whole-grain cereals and crackers, oatmeal, quinoa, popcorn, and brown rice.
*
¶ 	Δ
◊
§¥

-- 32 of 40 --

Refined grains: All refined-grain products and refined grains used as ingredients: for example, white breads,
refined grain cereals and crackers, pasta, and white rice. Refined grain choices should be enriched.
Dairy
All milk, including lactose-free and lactose-reduced products and fortified soy beverages (soymilk), yogurt, frozen
yogurt, dairy desserts, and cheeses. Most choices should be fat-free or low-fat. Cream, sour cream, and cream
cheese are not included due to their low-calcium content.
Protein foods
All seafood, meats, poultry, eggs, soy products, nuts, and seeds. Meats and poultry should be lean or low-fat and
nuts should be unsalted. Legumes (beans and peas) can be considered part of this group as well as the vegetable
group, but should be counted in one group only.
Δ Food group amounts shown in cup-(c) or ounce-equivalents (oz-eq). Oils are shown in grams (g). Quantity equivalents for
each food group are:
Vegetables and fruits, 1 cup-equivalent is: 1 cup raw or cooked vegetable or fruit, 1 cup vegetable or fruit juice, 2 cups
leafy salad greens, ½ cup dried fruit or vegetable.
Grains, 1 ounce-equivalent is: ½ cup cooked rice, pasta, or cereal; 1 ounce dry pasta or rice; 1 medium (1 ounce) slice
bread; 1 ounce of ready-to-eat cereal (about 1 cup of flaked cereal).
Dairy, 1 cup-equivalent is: 1 cup milk, yogurt, or fortified soymilk; 1½ ounces natural cheese such as cheddar cheese or
2 ounces of processed cheese.
Protein foods, 1 ounce-equivalent is: 1 ounce lean meat, poultry, or seafood; 1 egg; ¼ cup cooked beans or tofu; 1
Tbsp peanut butter; ½ ounce nuts or seeds.
◊ Amounts of whole grains in the patterns for children are less than the minimum of 3 oz-eq in all patterns recommended
for adults.
§ All foods are assumed to be in nutrient-dense forms, lean or low-fat, and prepared without added fats, sugars, refined
starches, or salt. If all food choices to meet food group recommendations are in nutrient-dense forms, a small number of
calories remain within the overall calorie limit of the pattern (ie, limit on calories for other uses). The number of these
calories depends on the overall calorie limit in the pattern and the amounts of food from each food group required to meet
nutritional goals. Nutritional goals are higher for the 1200- to 1600-calorie patterns than for the 1000-calorie pattern, so the
limit on calories for other uses is lower in the 1200- to 1600-calorie patterns. Calories up to the specified limit can be used
for added sugars, added refined starches, solid fats, alcohol, or to eat more than the recommended amount of food in a
food group. The overall eating pattern also should not exceed the limits of less than 10% of calories from added sugars and
less than 10% of calories from saturated fats. At most calorie levels, amounts that can be accommodated are less than these
limits. For adults of legal drinking age who choose to drink alcohol, a limit of up to 1 drink per day for females and up to 2
drinks per day for males within limits on calories for other uses applies; and calories from protein, carbohydrate, and total
fats should be within the acceptable macronutrient distribution ranges (AMDRs).
¥ Values are rounded.
Reproduced from: 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture, 8
Edition, December 2015. https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/about-dietary-guidelines/previous-editions/2015-dietary-guidelines (Accessed on April 7,
2021).
Graphic 106206 Version 7.0
th

-- 33 of 40 --

Table 6: Daily nutritional intake goals for children and adults
Age-sex groups
M/F
2-3
F
4-8
F
9-13
F
14-
18
F
19-
30
F
31-
50
F
51+
M
4-8
M
9-13
M
14-
18
M
19-
30
M
31-
50
M
51+
Calorie level
assessed
Source
of
goal
1000 	1200 	1600 	1800 	2000 	1800 	1600 	1400 	1800 	2200 	2400 	2200 	2000
Macronutrients
Protein
(% kcal)
AMDR 	5-20 	10-
30
10-
30
10-
30
10-
35
10-
35
10-
35
10-
30
10-
30
10-
30
10-
35
10-
35
10-
35
Protein (g) 	RDA 	13 	19 	34 	46 	46 	46 	46 	19 	34 	52 	56 	56 	56
Carbohydrate
(% kcal)
AMDR 	45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
45-
65
Carbohydrate
(g)
RDA 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130 	130
Fiber (g) 	14 g/
1000
kcal
14 	17 	22 	25 	28 	25 	22 	20 	25 	31 	34 	31 	28
Added sugars
(% kcal)
DGA 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10
Total lipid
(% kcal)
AMDR 	30-
40
25-
35
25-
35
25-
35
20-
35
20-
35
20-
35
25-
35
25-
35
25-
35
20-
35
20-
35
20-
35
Saturated
fatty acids
(% kcal)
DGA 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10 	<10
18:2 Linoleic
acid (g)
AI 	7 	10 	10 	11 	12 	12 	11 	10 	12 	16 	17 	17 	14
18:3 Linoleic
acid (g)
AI 	0.7 	0.9 	1.0 	1.1 	1.1 	1.1 	1.1 	0.9 	1.2 	1.6 	1.6 	1.6 	1.6
AMDR: Acceptable Macronutrient Distribution Ranges; RDA: Recommended Dietary Allowance; DGA: Dietary Guidelines for
Americans, 2020-2025; AI: adequate intake.
Adapted from: Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025. US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services 2020.
Available at: https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/resources/2020-2025-dietary-guidelines-online-materials (Accessed on June 23, 2022).
Graphic 138989 Version 1.0

-- 34 of 40 --

Table 7: Amount of fiber in different foods
Food 	Serving 	Grams of fiber
Fruits
Apple (with skin) 	1 medium apple 	4.4 g
Avocado 	1/2 cup 	5.0 g
Banana 	1 medium banana 	3.1 g
Blueberries 	1 cup 	3.6 g
Oranges 	1 orange 	3.1 g
Pear (with skin) 	1 medium pear 	5.5 g
Prunes 	1 cup (pitted) 	12.4 g
Raspberries 	1 cup 	8.0 g
Strawberries 	1/2 cup 	2.0 g
Juices
Apple (unsweetened, with added ascorbic acid) 	1 cup 	0.5 g
Grapefruit (white, canned, sweetened) 	1 cup 	0.2 g
Grape (unsweetened, with added ascorbic acid) 	1 cup 	0.5 g
Orange (with pulp) 	1 cup 	0.7 g
Prune 	1 cup 	2.6 g
Vegetables
Cooked
Carrots 	1/2 cup (sliced) 	2.3 g
Corn 	1/2 cup 	2.0 g
Green beans 	1 cup 	4.0 g
Peas 	1 cup 	8.8 g
Potato (baked, with skin) 	1 medium potato 	3.8 g
Raw
Broccoli 	1/2 cup 	2.6 g
Celery 	1 cup 	2.0 g
Cucumber (with peel) 	1 cucumber 	1.5 g
Lettuce 	1 cup (shredded) 	0.5 g
Spinach 	1 cup 	0.7 g
Tomato 	1 medium tomato 	1.5 g
Legumes
Baked beans (canned, no salt added) 	1/2 cup 	5.6 g
Black beans (cooked) 	1/2 cup 	7.5 g
Chickpeas (cooked) 	1/2 cup 	6.2 g
Kidney beans (canned) 	1/2 cup 	5.7 g

-- 35 of 40 --

Lentils (boiled) 	1/2 cup 	7.8 g
Lima beans (canned) 	1/2 cup 	6.6 g
Navy beans (cooked) 	1/2 cup 	9.5 g
Breads, pastas, flours
Bran muffins 	1 medium muffin 	5.2 g
Bread (rye) 	1 slice 	2.0 g
Bread (white) 	1 slice 	0.6 g
Bread (whole wheat) 	1 slice 	1.9 g
Bulgur (cooked) 	1/2 cup 	4.1 g
Cracker (rye wafers) 	2 crackers 	5.0 g
Oatmeal (cooked) 	1 cup 	4.0 g
Pasta and rice (cooked)
Macaroni 	1 cup 	2.5 g
Rice (brown) 	1 cup 	3.5 g
Rice (white) 	1 cup 	0.6 g
Spaghetti (regular) 	1 cup 	2.5 g
Spaghetti (whole wheat) 	1 cup 	5.4 g
Pearl barley (cooked) 	1 cup 	6.0 g
Popcorn (air popped) 	3 cups 	3.6 g
Breakfast cereals
Bran flakes 	3/4 cup 	5.5 g
"High-fiber" cereals 	1/2 cup 	14 g
Instant oatmeal 	1 pouch (43 g) 	3.0 g
Other cereals 	1/2 cup 	3.0 to 7.5 g
Nuts
Almonds 	1/2 cup 	8.7 g
Peanuts 	1/2 cup 	7.9 g
There are 2 kinds of fiber:
"Soluble fiber" is found in fruits, oats, barley, beans, and peas. It can help heart health, including lowering cholesterol.
"Insoluble fiber" is found in wheat, rye, and other grains. It can help with constipation.
The exact amount of fiber in a food depends on the specific product and brand. To learn how much fiber and other nutrients
are in different foods, visit the United States Department of Agriculture FoodData Central website.
* Ready-to-eat breakfast cereals have a wide range of fiber content. Types with high fiber content typically include bran
(wheat or oat) and/or oat fiber. Check the nutrition label of each brand for actual fiber content.
Data from: USDA FoodData Central. Available at: https://fdc.nal.usda.gov (Accessed on December 6, 2024).
Graphic 122822 Version 2.0
*

-- 36 of 40 --

Table 8: Sources and main effects of dietary fat
Type of fat 	Chief food sources
Leading food
contributors in
diets of adults in
the United States
Effects on
cholesterol
Effects on
coronary heart
disease
Trans fatty acids, from
partially hydrogenated
vegetable oils
Stick and full-fat
margarine;
commercial baked
goods; deep-fried
foods
Fast food; margarines;
commercial baked
goods (sweet rolls,
cookies, donuts)
Increases LDL
cholesterol, lowers
HDL cholesterol
Increases risk of
coronary heart disease
Saturated fatty acids 	Dairy foods; red meat;
some plant oils
(coconut, palm)
Dairy foods, especially
cheese, milk, ice
cream; red meat
Increases total
cholesterol
May increase risk of
coronary heart disease
Monounsaturated fatty
acids
Vegetable sources
(canola, olive oil); also
from meat, dairy
Beef; margarines;
chicken; olive oil
Lowers LDL cholesterol
and triglycerides,
maintains HDL
cholesterol
Probably has no
association
Polyunsaturated fatty
acids; n-6
Safflower, sunflower,
and corn oils
Mayonnaise;
margarines; salad
dressing; nuts;
chicken; peanut butter
Lowers LDL cholesterol
and triglycerides,
increases HDL
May reduce risk of
coronary heart disease
Polyunsaturated fatty
acids; n-3
Canola, soybean,
flaxseed, walnut oil;
wheat germ;
vegetables of cabbage
family
For longer-chain n-3
fatty acids: seafood,
especially fatty fish
Alpha-linolenic acid
(18:3): mayonnaise,
salad dressing,
margarines, beef;
longer-chain n-3: tuna,
other dark fish, shrimp
Lowers LDL cholesterol
and triglycerides,
maintains HDL
cholesterol
May reduce risk of
coronary heart disease
Leading food contributors combines the fatty acid content of the food with the frequency with which individuals eat that
food.
HDL: high-density lipoprotein; LDL: low-density lipoprotein.
* Data from participants in the ongoing Nurses' Health Study (women) and Health Professionals Follow-up Study (men).
Graphic 75539 Version 10.0
*

-- 37 of 40 --

Figure 1: Fat content of oils
When fats are needed for cooking, spreads, and other uses, oils with higher amounts of monounsaturated and/or
polyunsaturated fatty acids should be used, such as canola oil and olive oil. Those oils that are higher in n-3 polyunsaturated
fats (alpha-linolenic acid), such as walnut oil and, to a lesser extent, soybean oil, are also beneficial. Linoleic acid is an n-6
polyunsaturated fatty acid.
Graphic 51635 Version 10.0

-- 38 of 40 --

Table 9: Foods and products that may contain gluten
Frequently overlooked foods that may contain
gluten and need to be verified:
NOT ALLOWED in any form:
Brown rice syrup
Breading and coating mixes
Croutons
Energy bars
Flour or cereal products
Imitation bacon
Imitation seafood
Marinades
Panko (Japanese bread crumbs)
Pastas
Processed luncheon meats
Sauces, gravies
Self-basting poultry
Soy sauce or soy sauce solids
Soup bases
Stuffings, dressing
Thickeners (roux)
Communion wafers
Herbal supplements
Probiotic products
Drugs and over-the-counter medications
Nutritional supplements
Vitamins and mineral supplements
Play-Doh, crayons, paint, glue, paper mache – A potential
problem if the child puts their hands on or in the mouth
while playing; wash hands after using these products
Wheat (einkorn, durum, faro, graham, kamut, semolina,
spelt)
Rye
Barley
Triticale
Malt, malt flavoring, malt vinegar (are generally made
from barley; verify the source)
* In 2015, a study of 22 commonly used probiotics revealed that 12 (55%) contained gluten, including 2 that were labeled
gluten-free despite containing gluten levels higher than the 20 parts per million required for gluten-free labeling.
Reference:
1. Nazareth S, Lebwohl B, Voyksner JS, Green PH. Widespread Contamination of Probiotics With Gluten, Detected by Liquid Chromatography-Mass
Spectrometry. Gastroenterology 2015; 148:S28.
Modified with permission: "Frequently overlooked foods that may contain gluten and need to be verified." From Quick Start Diet Guide for Celiac Disease
© 2009. Celiac Disease Foundation. www.celiac.org.
Graphic 79790 Version 7.0
*
[1]

-- 39 of 40 --

Contributor Disclosures
Graham A Colditz, MD, DrPH Stocks: Prognosia, Inc. [Mammography breast cancer risk]; ProvanAI [Ovarian cancer risk].
Consultant/Advisory Boards: Lunit [Mammography breast imaging]. All of the relevant financial relationships listed have been
mitigated. David Seres, MD Stocks: Biomed Industries, Inc. [Biomedical informatics, drug development (Alzheimer’s and
obesity) – Financial relationship ended December 2024]. Grant/Research/Clinical Trial Support: Nasotrak Medical Pte, Ltd
[Feeding tube technology, safety study – Financial relationship ended December 2025]. Consultant/Advisory Boards: Aspisafe
[Tube feeding devices]; Biomed Industries, Inc [Biomedical informatics, drug development (Alzheimer’s and obesity)];
Community Surgical Supply [Outpatient infusion pharmacy and DME, parenteral nutrition]. All of the relevant financial
relationships listed have been mitigated. Zehra Hussain, MD, FACP No relevant financial relationship(s) with ineligible
companies to disclose.
Contributor disclosures are reviewed for conflicts of interest by the editorial group. When found, these are addressed by
vetting through a multi-level review process, and through requirements for references to be provided to support the content.
Appropriately referenced content is required of all authors and must conform to UpToDate standards of evidence.
Conflict of interest policy


-- 40 of 40 --

