Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2026 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Normal aging
INTRODUCTION
Aging is characterized by progressive and broadly predictable changes associated with
increased susceptibility to many diseases. Aging is not a homogenous process. Rather, organs
in the same person age at different rates influenced by multiple factors, including genetic
makeup, lifestyle choices, and environmental exposures. As an example, mutations
accumulate in stem cells with aging but are different depending on the organ [1]. Epigenetic
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) modifications with age are also highly tissue specific [2]. A Danish
twin study found that genetics accounted for approximately 25 percent of the variation in
longevity among twins and environmental factors accounted for approximately 50 percent [3].
However, with greater longevity (to age 90 or 100), genetic influences became more
important.
This topic will present an overview of normal aging. Effects of aging on the immune systems
and abnormal aging are discussed in more detail separately. (See "Immune function in older
adults".)
AGE-ASSOCIATED PHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES
Physiologic rhythms — The organization of rhythmic physiologic processes is altered by
aging. Age impacts the circadian pattern of body temperature, plasma cortisol, and sleep and
can cause desynchronization or "internal phase drift." Phase advances can lead to the
occurrence of some rhythmic functions (eg, the 24-hour body temperature trough and sleep
onset) one to two hours earlier in older adults as well as decreases in the magnitude of the
®
AUTHOR: George E Taffet, MD
SECTION EDITOR: Kenneth E Schmader, MD
DEPUTY EDITOR: Jane Givens, MD, MSCE
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Aug 2026.
This topic last updated: Sep 09, 2025.

-- 1 of 66 --

oscillations. In addition, age may delay the ability to reset physiologic rhythms to a new
photoperiod.
The pulsatile secretion of gonadotropins, growth hormone, thyrotropin, melatonin, and
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) are attenuated with age [4]. The diurnal rhythmicity of
cortisol is preserved in older age but with a decreased amplitude and delayed elevation [5].
One source of this dysfunction appears to be neuronal loss in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in
the hypothalamus [6].
Loss of complexity — Loss of complexity, a concept derived from the field of nonlinear
dynamics, may be a general principle of all aging systems [7]. This loss of complexity may
result in decreased heart rate variability, blood pressure variability, electroencephalographic
frequencies, response to auditory frequencies, and response to stress. Age-related loss of
complexity may not be immutable, however; as an example, senior athletes show greater
heart rate variability than sedentary age-matched controls [8].
Homeostenosis — Homeostenosis refers to the concept that, from maturity to senescence,
diminishing physiologic reserves are available to meet challenges to homeostasis. This
concept was first recognized by Walter Cannon in the 1940s [9]. Homeostenosis leads to the
increased vulnerability to disease that occurs with aging.
A figure graphically displays the traditional thinking about homeostenosis ( figure 1). The
endpoint of this process is frailty, where even the smallest challenge overwhelms the available
reserves and results in disaster. The "precipice" may be variably defined: death, cardiac arrest,
hospital admission, or onset of a symptom such as confusion or incontinence. Aging itself
brings the individual closer to the precipice by the loss of physiologic reserves. With aging,
the area in which the older person can bring themselves back to homeostasis by invoking
their reserves narrows or becomes stenotic.
Evidence for this model is plentiful. As an example, the Acute Physiologic and Chronic Health
Evaluation (APACHE) severity of illness scales, used to predict prognosis for patients in
intensive care, have a correction for age. The Acute Physiologic Assessment, a component of
the APACHE score, indicates deviation from homeostatic values for 12 variables, including vital
signs, oxygenation, pH, electrolytes, hematocrit, white blood count, and creatinine. A zero
score indicates homeostasis, and a greater point total indicates a larger deviation from
homeostasis [10,11]. In a comparison of young and old patients who had a cardiac arrest, the
younger group (mean age 59) had significantly higher Acute Physiologic Assessment scores in
the 24 hours pre-arrest than the older group (mean age 75) [12]. These data indicate that the
deviation from homeostasis needed to cross a critical threshold (cardiac arrest) is less in the
old. In practical terms, the creators of the APACHE scales recognize this by giving "age points"
so that total scores are equalized between the groups. (See "Predictive scoring systems in the
intensive care unit", section on 'Acute Physiologic and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE)'.)

-- 2 of 66 --

Maintaining homeostasis is a dynamic, active process. Frailty is the state when physiologic
reserves are maximally invoked just to maintain homeostasis and the most modest challenge
impels them across some threshold. Physiologic and functional measures are more likely to
be out of "normal range" with normal aging, and the fraction of measures that are out of
normal constitutes the Frailty Index [13]. The Frailty Index increases with age. Increased
severity of illness and frailty have independent effects on patient outcomes [14]. Physical
resilience is defined as the ability to withstand or recover from the functional impact caused
by acute health stressors. It is not the opposite of frailty nor homeostenosis but, because late-
life stressors are inevitable, may define successful aging [15]. (See "Frailty".)
The "family of precipices" concept is useful in understanding altered presentations of disease
in older adults ( figure 1). As an example, delirium is a common presentation of a wide
variety of illness in the older individual, a marker of the uneasy truce that the old brain
maintains with the environment. A given older person may have the same presentation
(confusion) for a urinary tract infection, gastrointestinal bleeding, or a myocardial infarction.
The systemic responses to these differing illnesses may be similar, involving catecholamines
and mediators of inflammation. The "anti-confusion reserves" are exhausted, so the distance
from homeostasis to this "precipice" is easily crossed.
In summary, an apparent loss of physiologic reserves in older adults leads to intolerance to
challenges to their homeostasis. This increased vulnerability is in part because the older
person is continually expending reserves to compensate for primary age changes as well as
other processes that are absent or trivial in the younger individual. Thus, older adults have
increased frailty and vulnerability as well as decreased robustness and resilience.
Nonlinearity of aging — Aging is not linear and occurs at a faster rate at different ages. An
analysis of plasma markers reveals distinct patterns of dysregulated molecules, indicating two
peak ages where major dysregulation in aging occurs: at 44 years old, and again at 60 years
old [16].
HEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
In the absence of additional challenges, the hematopoietic system maintains adequate
function throughout an individual's lifespan [17]. Red cell lifespan, iron turnover, and blood
volume are unchanged with age. However, bone marrow mass decreases and fat in the bone
marrow increases with age [18,19]. This increase in fat is not uniform; it is more extensive in
the femoral head than the shaft [20]. Hematopoietic functional reserves are reduced with age.
Thus, advanced age may be an important consideration for determining suitability as a donor
for hematopoietic cell transplantation [21] or tolerance of chemotherapy.

-- 3 of 66 --

The compensatory hematopoietic response to phlebotomy, hypoxia, and other challenges is
delayed and less vigorous in the older person [22]. This is due to changes to populations of
progenitor cells, and to the bone marrow environmental matrix [23]. As an example, studies
comparing the bone marrow of healthy older and younger patients found a 35 percent
decrease in the colony size of the stimulated erythroid progenitor (colony-forming unit-
erythroid [CFU-E]) cells in older individuals [24]. Another study suggests that inability to
produce critical stimulatory hormones (stem cell factor, granulocyte macrophage colony-
stimulating factor [GM-CSF], and interleukin 3 [IL-3]) is the major factor accounting for
functional difference between bone marrow from older and younger people [25].
Analysis of hematopoietic precursor cells from older adults reveals a dramatic decrease in
genetic diversity, possibly related to genetic drift or environmental changes [26]. The
frequency of clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) and its associated
mutations reaches 50 percent in those over 90 [27]. In addition to having an increased risk
(0.5 percent per year) of development of hematologic malignancies [28], age-related CHIP is
associated with increased mortality from many causes [26]. One relatively common finding in
older men is loss of the Y chromosome from a proportion of leukocytes as a clone marker
[29]. The presence of this clone, as with many of the other mutations defining age-related
CHIP, is associated with increased mortality from both cancers and nononcologic processes
[30,31].
While physiologic aging does not result in anemia, the risk of anemia is increased by a
number of mechanisms with age. Hepcidin, an iron regulatory hormone, is stimulated by
inflammatory cytokines. Hepcidin blocks iron release from macrophages and hepatocytes
(which recycle it from hemophagocytosis) and inhibits iron transport from enterocytes in the
gut to the plasma. Thus, inflammaging, the persistent low-level proinflammatory state in
normal older adults, impairs their response to erythropoietin or similar stimuli [32].
Total circulating white cell counts do not change with age in healthy older people, but the
function of several cell types is reduced. Age-related changes in the immune system are
discussed separately. (See 'Immune system' below and "Immune function in older adults".)
Age is a significant risk factor for myelotoxicity due to chemotherapy regimens for
malignancies [33]. However, consistent with many other changes, heightened sensitivity to
chemotherapy and impaired recovery of the bone marrow is not a uniform finding in all older
adults. (See "Systemic chemotherapy for cancer in older adults".)
Though the number of platelets is unchanged with age, platelet responsiveness to a number
of thrombotic stimulators is increased. Reduced availability of nitric oxide and increased
oxidative damage have been implicated in age-associated platelet hyperresponsiveness [34].
This results in a small but consistent decrease in bleeding time with age. Fibrinogen, factor V,
factor VII, factor VIII, factor IX, high molecular-weight kininogen, and prekallikrein increase

-- 4 of 66 --

with age in healthy humans, possibly related to the low-grade inflammation that is part of
normal aging [35]. Fibrin degradation fragments (D-dimers) are elevated twofold in healthy
older subjects with no evidence of thrombosis and may be even higher in hospitalized older
adults, such that an age-incorporating formula for D-dimer interpretation has been
suggested [36]. Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1, the major inhibitor of fibrinolysis, increases
dramatically with aging [37-39]. Thus, old age should be considered a procoagulant state, and
age is an important risk factor for deep venous thrombosis.
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
The overall effects of aging on the gastrointestinal system are modest; aging itself does not
cause malnourishment. Nonetheless, age-related changes in gastrointestinal systems affect
the incidence and presentation of multiple gastrointestinal problems in older adults.
Oropharynx — The epithelial lining of the oral mucosa thins with age. The gums recede,
exposing the tooth cementum, which is more prone to decay, and predisposing older persons
to root caries and incomplete mastication [40]. Edentate patients are at greater risk for
inadequate nutritional intake compared with those with partial or full retention of their teeth
[41].
Modest age-associated changes occur in the salivary glands, including a small decrease in the
number of acinar cells, and up to a 50 percent decrease in maximal saliva production from
parotid salivary glands [42]. Although accessory salivary gland production is unchanged, fatty
infiltration of these glands increases with age [43], making the discrimination between
Sjögren's disease and age-associated dry mouth more dependent on the extent of fibrosis
than fat [44]. Up to 50 percent of older patients have subjective complaints of dry mouth,
which can impact chewing and swallowing. Age-related changes in the composition of saliva
will modify the adhesion and viscosity of the oral salivary film [45]. However, some of these
complaints may be attributed to medication side effects rather than aging itself [46].
Transfer of the food bolus to the pharynx is altered in the majority of older patients. Loss of
esophageal muscle compliance results in increased resistance to flow across the upper
esophageal sphincter [47]. Up to 60 percent of older patients without dysphagia have
abnormal transfer to the pharynx on videofluoroscopy [48]. The strength and coordination of
the tongue is impaired in healthy 80-year-old individuals [49]. Less effective mastication and
decreased food clearance from the pharynx lead to increased aspiration risk in older adults.
Additionally, protective aerodigestive reflexes in the pharynx stimulated by injecting water
into the mouth are frequently absent in older people [50].
Structural and functional changes in the oropharynx may impact the mechanisms of
obstruction in patients with sleep apnea. Older patients had high incidence of collapse in the

-- 5 of 66 --

velum region and much lower oropharyngeal lateral wall collapse compared with younger
patients [51].
Esophagus — Anatomic changes in the esophagus include hypertrophy of the skeletal muscle
at the upper third, decrease in myenteric ganglion cells that coordinate peristalsis, and
perhaps increased smooth muscle thickness [40]. The amplitude of esophageal contractions
during peristalsis decreases, but the movement of food is not impaired. However, using
advanced manometric techniques, more subtle abnormalities in liquid propagation into the
stomach can be seen in 40 percent of older adults [52]. Upper esophageal sphincter and
esophageal body pressure responses to large-volume simulated reflux are preserved in
healthy 70-year-olds, but responses to lower-volume, slowly applied reflux fluid and
associated postreflux residue are reduced in elderly individuals, with significant implications
for aspiration risk [53]. Abnormal peristalsis after swallowing and non-peristaltic repetitive
contractions, at one time attributed to old age and called "presbyesophagus," are now
thought to be due to disease processes.
Secondary contractions contribute to clearance of refluxed food or acid. Diminution of these
contractions, combined with decreased lower esophageal sphincter tone, results in increased
gastric acid exposure [40]. Secondary esophageal contractions induced by esophageal
distention and acid infusion into the esophagus appear to be greatly reduced with age
[40,53]. Sensation of distention, and possibly tissue damage, in the distal esophagus is also
impaired with age [54]. Thus, many older patients with severe reflux esophagitis seen at
endoscopy have surprisingly little symptomatology.
Stomach — Early studies suggested that gastric acid production decreased dramatically with
age, with a decrease in parietal cells and an increase in interstitial leukocytes [55]. Subsequent
studies challenge those findings and suggest that 90 percent of people aged 65 and over are
able to acidify gastric contents in the basal unstimulated state [56,57]. Helicobacter pylori
infection may account for the discrepancies between early and more recent work [58]. Over
50 percent of older people are infected with H. pylori, with the prevalence increasing with
advancing age [59]. (See "Helicobacter pylori: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, and overview of
disease associations", section on 'Prevalence'.)
Increased rates of gastritis and increased sensitivity to gastric irritants, such as nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory medications or bisphosphonates, in older adults may be related to several
age-related physiologic changes: decreased prostaglandin synthesis, decreased bicarbonate
and nonparietal fluid secretion, delayed gastric emptying, and impaired microcirculation [60].
In addition to an increased sensitivity to gastric insults, rates of healing are impaired by a host
of mechanisms in older people [61]. Gastric motility is determined by the combined effects of
the enteric nerves, smooth muscle, and the interstitial cells of Cajal. The number and volume
of the interstitial cells of Cajal bodies decreases by over 10 percent per decade in normal

-- 6 of 66 --

people without motility complaints [62]. In aging rat models, sensory neural function is
decreased, delaying recognition of experimentally induced mucosal injury [40].
The stomach also has critical endocrine functions. Serum levels of ghrelin and gastrin, as well
as ghrelin signaling, are reduced in healthy older adults [63,64].
Small intestine — The small intestine undergoes modest anatomic changes, including
moderate villus atrophy and coarsening of the mucosae. The absorption of several
micronutrients (eg, xylose, folic acid, B12, copper) may decrease with age but remain
adequate for homeostasis [65]. The efficiency of calcium absorption from the gut lumen
decreases because of decreased vitamin D receptors in the gut and decreased levels of
circulating 25(OH) vitamin D. Typically, women over age 75 absorb 25 percent less of a given
dose of calcium than younger women, especially if there is reduced acid secretion [66]. Iron
may also be less well-absorbed, but overall aging impacts the absorption of macronutrients
minimally [65].
Consumed carbohydrates result in significantly more hydrogen excretion in the older adults,
suggesting malabsorption and subsequent bacterial metabolism of the carbohydrate in the
aging gut [67]. Up to 15 percent of residents in senior congregate housing have evidence of
bacterial overgrowth as assessed by breath hydrogen testing [68]. Bacterial overgrowth and
associated malabsorption can affect nutritional status and micronutrient absorption.
Additionally, the barrier function of the small intestine may be compromised and local
inflammation activated in response [69].
Decreases in sensory and myenteric neurons contribute to the increased frequency of
painless ulcers with increased age [40,70]. Interestingly, in several animal studies, caloric
restriction has been shown to decrease myenteric neuronal loss with age [71]. Small intestinal
transit time (measured with capsule endoscopy) seems to be unchanged by age [72].
Older people require lower radiation doses to develop acute radiation syndrome or to die
from radiation, due to increased sensitivity of the small bowel to radiation [73].
Large intestine — Anatomic changes with aging in the large intestine include mucosal
atrophy, cellular and structural abnormalities in the mucosal glands, hypertrophy of the
muscularis mucosa, and atrophy of the muscularis externa. Functional changes include
altered coordination of contraction and increased opioid sensitivity that may predispose the
older person to drug-induced constipation.
Studies have not been consistent regarding alterations in colonic motility, but the general
consensus is that colonic propulsive motility is reduced with age, with colonic transit time
measured by capsule endoscopy being almost doubled in community-dwelling older adults
compared with young people [74]. Approximately one-fourth of those over 65 years old suffer
from chronic constipation [41]. One factor contributing to reduced motility is an age-related

-- 7 of 66 --

reduction in myenteric plexus neurons and a decline in the interstitial cells of Cajal similar to
that seen in the stomach. Intrinsic sensory neurons that respond to physicochemical changes
may degenerate disproportionately compared with motor enteric neurons. The loss of
sensory input into local reflex pathways could contribute to reduced propulsive motility [75].
(See "Etiology and evaluation of chronic constipation in adults".)
The loss of intrinsic sensory neurons may also contribute to the decreased visceral response,
including decrease in perceived pain with bowel perforation, distention, or ischemia [76]. As
an example, the rigid surgical abdomen after appendiceal perforation is a less frequent
finding in those over 75, leading to delayed diagnosis [77].
Older women may be more predisposed to fecal incontinence than older men as the resting
pressure and squeeze pressure decrease with age, resulting in decreased anal sphincter tone
[78]. In one study, both male and female patients aged greater than 70 years had 30 to 40
percent decreases in sphincter pressures compared with controls less than 30 years of age
[79]. The internal anal sphincter of continent older people is thickened, perhaps to
compensate for decreased resting and maximum pressures in the anal canal with age.
However, thinning of the external sphincter correlated with fecal incontinence more than age
[80].
Diverticula are common in Western populations over age 65, with prevalence ≥65 percent
[81]. The prevalence of diverticula is lower in other populations, presumably with other diets,
but nonetheless there remains a strong age-dependence [82]. The formation of colonic
diverticula is attributed to decreased muscle wall strength, decreased bowel wall compliance,
and increased intraabdominal pressure required for stool excretion [81]. Slower large bowel
transit and increased segmental contractions (as opposed to propulsive contractions) result in
increased water reabsorption, leaving harder stools and increasing the likelihood of wall
failure [40]. (See "Colonic diverticulosis and diverticular disease: Epidemiology, risk factors,
and pathogenesis".)
The risk of colon cancer increases with age. In addition to prolonged exposure to potential
carcinogens, aging is associated with increased proliferation and decreased apoptosis in the
colonic mucosa [83]. The biology of these changes is a rich area for exploration. (See
"Epidemiology and risk factors for colorectal cancer".)
The barrier function of colonic epithelium may be compromised and has been implicated in
promoting the proinflammatory state, "inflammaging." Isolated specimens from normal
aging baboon colon showed increased permeability to potential toxins, decreases in the key
structural components of the tight junctions, and enhanced downstream inflammatory
responses [84]. The deterioration in the barrier function of the intestine with age appears to
occur across species and has been implicated in primary aging changes like thymic evolution
[85,86]. By contrast, barrier function for lactulose and sucrose is preserved in healthy 65- to

-- 8 of 66 --

75-year-old persons [87] but, for many other chemicals, the effects of age in healthy older
adults are unknown.
The gut microbiome changes with healthy aging and with age-associated diseases. Some
have proposed a "healthy signature" based on stool analysis [88], while others suggest that it
is the gut biome through its effect of metabolites and inflammation that promotes healthy
aging [89]. The immune system of the intestinal mucosa, a barrier for many products of the
microbiome, is compromised with aging [90]. Thus, the extent with which an older adult
interacts with their microbiome may be increased.
Hepatobiliary system — Liver mass decreases between 20 and 40 percent with age, and liver
perfusion and blood flow decreases up to 50 percent between the 3 and 10 decades of life
[91]. Lipofuscin accumulates in hepatocytes with age and is also seen in young patients with
severe malnutrition, accounting for an appearance that has been described as "brown
atrophy." Older livers have more macrohepatocytes (large cells) and increased polyploidy [92].
The number of mitochondria per cell increases with age [93]. The older liver is less tolerant of
ischemia which increases the risk of using older livers for transplantation [94]. However, with
adequate screening criteria, livers from those over 80 can have excellent outcomes after
transplant [95].
The following findings are relevant to liver function in older adults:
rd 	th
Although many liver functions decline (diminished erythromycin demethylation, galactose
elimination, and reduced caffeine clearance), standard "liver function tests" (transaminases,
alkaline phosphatase) are minimally affected by age [40,96].
●
Findings are contradictory regarding albumin synthesis in older livers; animal studies found
reductions consistent with a loss of liver mass [97], although this was not confirmed in a
study in healthy older people [98]. Serum albumin declines slightly with normal human
aging [99]. Interestingly, studies have shown that mortality of nursing home residents
correlates with albumin levels, even within the normal range [100].
●
The metabolism of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol decreases with a reduction in
LDL receptors in older patients [101], which could contribute to the higher serum LDL levels
in older adults [97].
●
Cytochrome P450 content decreases with age, with one study finding a 32 percent
decrement comparing individuals over 70 years with a group 20 to 29 years of age [102].
This may account for the finding that metabolic clearance of many drugs is 20 to 40 percent
slower in older people [103]. (See "Drug prescribing for older adults".)
●
The lower amounts of vitamin K antagonists needed to anticoagulate older people are
consistent with age-related decreased synthesis of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors
●

-- 9 of 66 --

Younger livers show a robust regenerative response to liver injury characterized by mitogen-
activated protein kinase activity, which declines with age [101]. One consequence of this
impaired liver regeneration is that a larger remaining liver is required for older people after
major hepatectomy [106].
Exocrine pancreas — The exocrine pancreas undergoes only modest alterations with age.
Minor atrophic and fibrotic changes have essentially no impact on pancreatic exocrine
function [67]. The fat fraction of the pancreas increases with age in healthy women [107].
Noninvasive pancreatography indicates main pancreatic duct dilatation, greater incidence of
cysts and side branches of the pancreatic ducts [108], and a decrease in stimulated pancreatic
flow with advancing age [109]. Aged animals showed decreased output of lipase and amylase
in response to meals that were high in fat or carbohydrates [40].
RENAL SYSTEM
There are multiple effects of aging on the renal system ( table 1). Kidney mass decreases by
25 to 30 percent between the ages of 30 and 80 years, with the steepest decline after age 50.
In addition, fat and fibrosis replace some of the remaining functional parenchyma. Loss
occurs primarily in the cortex and preferentially affects those nephrons most important to
maximal urine concentration. Senescent cells are more common with increasing age in donor
kidney cortexes [110], suggesting that senolytic agents may have a potential role in improving
age-related declines in renal function [111]. As the senescent cells produce proinflammatory
as well as profibrotic signals, the extent of fibrosis, extracellular matrix, and inflammation
increases with age [112].
Normal aging is associated with a reduction in functional glomeruli of almost 50 percent, as
found in a comparison of kidneys from donors aged 18 to 29 with those aged 70 to 75 years.
The number of sclerotic glomeruli increased almost 10-fold across the same groups [113].
Atrophy and resorption of nephrons may contribute to the age effect more than diffuse
sclerosis of glomeruli [114]. The remaining glomeruli have impaired filtering ability, though
single nephron studies showed preserved filtration rate until age 70 [115]. Intrarenal vascular
changes include spiraling of the afferent arterioles, narrowing of the larger arteries, intimal
fibrosis [116], and shunts between afferent and efferent arterioles allowing blood flow to
bypass the glomeruli [117]. Nephrosclerosis (global glomerulosclerosis, interstitial fibrosis,
and arteriosclerosis) was identified in donor kidneys to be used for transplantation in 3
[104].
Although function and anatomy of the gall bladder are well preserved in old age, the bile
composition has a higher lithogenic index, predisposing the older person to cholesterol
gallstone formation [105].
●

-- 10 of 66 --

percent of donors 18 to 29 years old and in 73 percent of donors 70 to 77 years old [118].
Evidence of age-associated renal remodeling is confirmed with proteomic studies of urine
from healthy individuals [119].
At baseline, kidney plasma blood flow is 40 percent lower in healthy normotensive older men
than in young men, and this difference is magnified under conditions that stimulate renal
vasodilation [120]. Studies suggest that older kidneys may be maintained in a state of
vasodilation to compensate for loss of vasculature [120,121]. Vasodilating prostaglandins are
increased at baseline in normal older adults [122], and this contributes to the increased
(roughly doubled) risk of kidney injury with use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) in older people [123,124].
Creatinine clearance decreases with age (7.5 to 10 mL per minute per decade), although there
is wide variability in decline seen in longitudinal studies of healthy older adults [125]. As many
as one-third of older adults monitored for over a decade have no change at all (half those
actually improve) in the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), one-third have a slight decline, and
one-third have a more marked decline. Creatinine production also decreases with age and
tubular secretion of creatinine increases, so that the serum creatinine may remain stable
despite decreases in the GFR [126]. Hypertrophied and compensating nephrons are often less
tolerant of additional insults thus more prone to acute kidney injury [127]. All of the
commonly used equations for estimating creatinine clearance factor age into the formulae;
however, the estimated GFR (eGFR) provided by some electronic health records need to be
utilized cautiously, especially with those over 90 [128,129].
Cystatin C-based estimates of kidney function may be useful when accurate assessment in an
older person is necessary [130]. In healthy older people, an increase of roughly 50 percent in
cystatin C levels is seen from age 40 to age 80 [131] (see "Calculation of the creatinine
clearance"). Increases in cystatin C track robustly with functional decline in longitudinal
studies [132]. More physically active older men had greater preservation of GFR [133].
Fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are maintained relatively well with aging, in the absence of
challenges. However, the ability to maximally dilute urine and excrete a water load is impaired
and compromises volume regulation under conditions of stress. In the setting of dehydration,
the minimum urine flow rate is twice as great in those over 70 compared with those under 40,
and the maximum urine osmolality is also reduced with age [134]. In addition to this impaired
ability to retain water and solute, the older kidney also is impaired in its ability to retain amino
acids and glucose.
Other functional changes in the renal system are a reduction of urine acidification and
impairment in excreting an acid load. The older kidney is more prone to nephrotoxicity related
to medications, chemotherapy, or intravenous contrast [135,136]. Additionally, the injured
older kidney is less likely to recover from acute insult [137]. The older kidney is also more

-- 11 of 66 --

vulnerable to ischemic insult, with a greater number of cells undergoing apoptosis following
ischemia than in the young kidney. Tubular cells appear to have diminished ability to entirely
repopulate the tubules after an acute ischemic insult, potentially an effect of the increasing
senescent cell population of the aging kidney [111].
Hormonal functions of the kidney are affected by aging, including decreased hydroxylation of
vitamin D [138,139]. In older women, the vitamin D response to parathyroid hormone infusion
is attenuated [140]. Downregulation of the renin-angiotensin aldosterone system is seen in
normal and hypertensive older people [141-143]. However, the autonomous release of
aldosterone by aldosterone-producing cell clusters is increasingly common with age, at least
to age 70 [144]. This leads to lack of suppression of aldosterone, with salt loading and
inadequate increases in response to sodium restriction [144]. The production of
erythropoietin in response to hemoglobin, however, appears to be unchanged with age [145].
However, others have reported the circulating erythropoietin levels in older adults with
anemia is lower than young adults with the same level of anemia [146]. Finally, the kidney is a
primary source for klotho, a membrane protein involved in phosphate metabolism that may
have important implications for aging [147]. The kidneys' production of klotho decreases with
increasing age and genetic polymorphisms that increase its level are associated with
increased longevity [148].
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Advancing age increases the risk for hypertension and coronary artery disease. The
prevalence of coronary artery disease at autopsy may reach 75 percent after the sixth decade
in men and two decades later in women [149]. Therefore, to isolate age-related cardiovascular
change from disease-related change, studies must carefully select older individuals with no
underlying cardiovascular condition. The Baltimore Longitudinal study studied highly
screened older individuals and found only a minimal impact of aging on resting
cardiovascular function such as left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) [150]. This reflects the
adequacy of the compensatory strategies used by the old heart (and vascular system) to
counteract subtle and gradual age-associated physiologic, molecular, and biochemical
changes. However, by invoking available compensatory mechanisms to maintain resting
function, the older person is less able to compensate for subsequent challenges [151]. (See
'Homeostenosis' above.)
Many older people perform little physical activity. Typical age changes may therefore also
reflect the impact of factors related to lifestyle and comorbidity, and the contribution of age
alone may be difficult to determine. Physical exercise may mitigate some of the age-related
changes.

-- 12 of 66 --

Modest anatomic changes occur in the right side of the heart. Right atrial volume increases
modestly; however, mean and peak systolic blood flow in the superior and inferior vena cavae
decrease with age [152]. By contrast, the left atrium enlarges, and the left ventricle stiffens
with aging. Left atrial volume, corrected for body size, increases roughly 50 percent from the
third decade to the eighth [153]. The larger left atrium becomes stiffer, less able to perform as
a reservoir [154,155]. Age also increases the risk of left atrial cardiomyopathy significantly
[156]. The left ventricle also hypertrophies with age, with an average increase in left
ventricular wall thickness of 10 percent [157]. In healthy women, the left ventricle end
diastolic volume decreases by 10 to 15 percent from age 20 to age 80 [158]. A group of highly
screened, healthy older people had more modest changes with age. With exercise, at the
same filling pressures, older adults had smaller left ventricular volumes, suggesting the
diastolic stiffness is also important in limiting maximum cardiac output [159].
Both the aortic valve and mitral annulus thicken and develop calcific deposits [160]. Mitral
annular calcification may predispose the older person to cardiac conduction problems. (See
"Valvular heart disease in older adults".)
Ventricular cardiomyocytes hypertrophy, in part as a response to the increased afterload
produced by large artery stiffening [161,162]. The largest myocytes are also the most
vulnerable to challenge [162]. Loss of myocytes with age has been reported to occur by both
apoptosis and necrosis; the total number of cardiomyocytes may be reduced significantly in
healthy human hearts [161,163,164]. The loss of myocytes is compensated for by cell
hypertrophy, with no net loss in cardiac mass. As well, substantial cellular dropout occurs in
the sinoatrial (SA) node and more modest cellular loss at the atrioventricular node. This may
underlie increased sensitivity of the older SA node to calcium channel blockers [165].
There is a negligible age-related decrease in the resting heart rate but a marked decrease in
the maximum heart rate in response to exertion or other stressors. The intrinsic heart rate
(the rate without sympathetic or parasympathetic input to the heart) decreases by five to six
beats per minute each decade. The response to both parasympathetic antagonists (atropine)
and beta-adrenergic agonists (isoproterenol) is decreased in healthy older people [166]. The
energy state (phosphocreatine to ATP ratio) of the older heart is diminished, and correlates
with poorer diastolic function and lower peak work [167]. Cannabinoid receptors, both CB1
and CB2, are reduced in hearts from people older than 50 [168], which may attenuate some of
the cardiovascular effects of cannabinoids in older people [168,169].
Heart rate reflects the combined effects of sympathetic and parasympathetic tones. The
target maximum heart rate is calculated as "220 – age." Women may have a more gradual
decline and a correction factor of 0.85 to 0.90 may adjust the target heart rate for women.
Exercise training does not modify the age-associated decline in maximum heart rate [170].
Heart rate variability, perhaps due to decreased parasympathetic tone and decreased
sympathetic responsiveness, also decreases with age [171].

-- 13 of 66 --

The prevalence of premature atrial complex (also referred to a premature atrial beat,
premature supraventricular complex, or premature supraventricular beat) increases with age
but is not associated with increased cardiac risk [172]. An increase in isolated ventricular
ectopic beats is also seen in healthy older individuals [173].
The culmination of age-associated cardiovascular changes is a decrease in maximum work,
measured as maximum oxygen utilization (VO2max) on exercise testing. Exercise training in
sedentary older individuals can improve this parameter, but a decline with age in parameters
such as maximum heart rate is seen even in highly fit individuals [170].
Resting LVEF is not changed in healthy older people, but there are smaller increases in LVEF in
response to exercise [174]. At maximum effort, LVEF in the young is above 80 percent, while
by age 80 it is 70 percent [150]. Older hearts also have impaired early left ventricular filling
with a compensatory greater contribution from atrial systole than younger hearts [175]. This
impairment in diastolic function reflects multiple age-related changes from decreased
sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium uptake due to alterations of the pump protein (SERCA 2a)
[176], increased sarcoplasmic reticulum leak, reduced energetics [177], and increased cardiac
interstitial fibrosis [178,179].
This diastolic dysfunction and increased reliance on atrial systole may in part explain why
atrial fibrillation is more likely to precipitate heart failure in older adults. An atrial gallop (S4) is
a normal finding on physical examination in individuals in sinus rhythm over 75, a
manifestation of the increased contribution of left atrial systole to ventricular filling. Perhaps
as a marker of the increased filling pressure at rest, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is
increased with age in healthy people [180]. With exertion, healthy older people have a greater
increase in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, reflecting a reliance on Starling's law to
increase cardiac output [181].
The old heart is a vulnerable heart. For example, mortality and the probability of developing
heart failure after a myocardial infarction increase dramatically with age. While myocardial
infarction is not a part of normal aging, response to this systemic challenge is impaired
because of the aging process. Similarly, doxorubicin-related heart failure occurs with greater
frequency and at a lower cumulative dose in those over 65 [182].
Large arteries are altered with age. The aorta increases in diameter, with the upper limits of
normal increasing by approximately 5 mm from age 20 to 40 compared with those over 60
[183]. Length increases a few cm from age 20 to 80 [184]. The aorta increases stiffness as
measured by pulse wave velocity (PWV) two- to threefold. This means that pressure waves
generated when the aortic valve opens are reflected and return to the heart before the aortic
valve is closed, thus increasing the load on the heart. In youth, the reflected waves return
after the aortic valve is closed and help perfuse the coronary arteries. In serial studies using
four-dimensional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the increases in aortic PWV were

-- 14 of 66 --

greater in the older groups (70 to 80) of males and females up to 10 percent over six years
[185]. While PWV requires special equipment to measure, a similar pattern is found in pulse
pressure (systolic-diastolic) [186]. Critically the increase in arterial stiffness, especially in the
carotids, correlates with decreasing cerebral blood flow in cognitively normal older adults
[187]. The effects of disease such as hypertension can double the rate of stiffening [188] and
chronic exercise can attenuate it. The ability of the brachial artery to dilate in response to a
heat load is relatively preserved while the lower extremity in the older person is diminished
[189].
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Aging, in the absence of additional challenges, does not result in hypoxia or pneumonia.
However, age-related anatomic and functional changes in the respiratory system contribute
to the increased frequency of pneumonia, increased likelihood of hypoxia, and decreased
maximum oxygen uptake in the older person.
The lung undergoes a number of anatomic changes [190]. Alveolar ducts enlarge due to loss
of elastic tissue and alterations in the supporting network of collagen fibers, resulting in a
decreased surface area for gas exchange. Overall, approximately one-third of the surface area
per volume of lung tissue is lost over the life span, and anatomic dead space increases [191].
The loss of lung elastic tissue decreases recoil and results in modest reduction in the
expiratory boundary of the maximal flow-volume envelope. The changes in elastic recoil are
not uniform and therefore contribute to the heterogeneity in ventilation and the VQ
mismatch described below [192]. During maximal exercise, this may limit expiratory airflow
and produce dynamic lung hyperinflation [193]. Surfactant composition is also altered by age
[194], and alveolar fluid has a greater content of proinflammatory proteins and a reduced
antiinflammatory profile [195]. Lung angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) expression (the
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [SARS-CoV-2] virus receptor) increases with
age [196]. Many of these changes in lung function are driven by senescent cells [197]. Carbon
monoxide diffusion studies find that diffusion capacity decreases approximately 5 percent per
decade [198], although this may be less in highly fit older individuals [199].
Age increases ventilation-perfusion mismatching because airways in dependent portions of
the older lung, areas that are better perfused than elsewhere, are closed during all or part of
the respiratory cycle. This is a critical factor in the declining arterial PO with age. Alveolar PO
does not change with age, but age increases the alveolar-arterial (A-a) oxygen gradient. The
effect of the ventilation-perfusion mismatch is more marked in the supine than sitting
position because of positional changes in thoracic mechanics [200]. The decrease in arterial
PO (PaO ) may not be linear but appears to decline from age 30 until 70 or 75 and thereafter
remains almost constant. While age-related changes do not result in hypoxia at sea level,
older adults may approach hypoxia at altitude [201]. The fall on PaO is slightly greater in
2 	2
2 	2
2

-- 15 of 66 --

women than men [200,202]. Older people may have little reserve for further decrements in
pulmonary function before important hemoglobin desaturation occurs.
In contrast to the decrease in PaO and increase in the A-a oxygen gradient, carbon dioxide
excretion is not impaired with age; changes in PaCO are due to disease and should not be
attributed to age alone [203].
The chest wall also changes with age; increased stiffness of the chest wall predominates over
an increase in compliance of the lung parenchyma. Overall chest wall compliance decreases
by one-third from age 30 to 75 [204]. Intercostal muscle contraction accounts for less chest
expansion in older individuals, with a relatively greater contribution from abdominal muscles.
Abdominal muscles are only partially effective in ventilating in the seated (or supine) position.
Thus, full airway expansion occurs only in the standing position in older adults. Atelectasis
can result in an increased A-a gradient.
As the chest remodels with age, the diaphragm flattens and becomes less efficient. The
diaphragmatic changes likely contribute to the increase in the work of breathing during
exercise, which can increase 30 percent [205]. Using simulations that model mechanical
ventilation, the older person has to work harder to breathe, which may contribute to difficulty
in weaning from the ventilator [206].
The effect of age on traditional pulmonary function tests is shown in the graph ( figure 2).
With advancing age, functional reserves decrease. In nonsmoking men, forced vital capacity
(FVC) decreases between 0.15 and 0.3 liters per decade, and forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV ) decreases by 0.2 to 0.3 liters per decade, with steeper decline in the seventh
and eight decades [207,208]. Age-related changes in women decline less steeply. The
decreases in pulmonary function tests correlate with decreases in skeletal muscle strength, as
measured by grip strength [209]. The decrease in FEV is accelerated after menopause [210]
and may be reduced by long-term hormone replacement therapy [211] and has been reduced
by a decrease in second-hand smoke exposure [212]. Total lung capacity (proportional to
height) does not change significantly with age; however, the residual volume (air left in the
lung at the end of full expiration) increases by as much as 10 percent per decade because of a
higher closing volume. Of note, however, the ability to properly perform pulmonary function
tests (and use inhalers) decreases in older adult patients [213]. Finally, the correlations
between spirometry and diffusion parameters is poor in healthy older people, suggesting that
lung aging is not a uniform process [214].
The Cardiovascular Health Study population experienced age-related decreases in maximal
inspiratory pressure (MIP) or force, and a smaller decrement in maximal expiratory force
parameters [215]. The decline in MIP is linear until age 65 but appears to accelerate
afterwards [216]. Both the inspiratory force and expiratory force are significantly greater in
physically active older people than sedentary ones. Diaphragm thickness was also greater in
2
2
1
1

-- 16 of 66 --

the active old group [217], but some of the apparent decrease in diaphragm strength may be
due to the loss of curvature, the result of the chest wall changes described above [218].
Nevertheless, some of the decrements described above are due to sedentary lifestyle.
Older persons have decreased responses to hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and mechanical
loading, such as breathing through a small-diameter endotracheal tube [219]. The central
drive to the respiratory muscles is decreased [220]. Many of these changes are minimized
with exercise; the implication is that central or peripheral receptor hypo-responsiveness may
be due in part to deconditioning, and that exercise training can induce compensation for age-
related changes. Older adults recover more slowly from insults that damage or destroy lung
tissue [221].
Cough is less vigorous in the older person because of the age effects on respiratory muscle
strength and greater closing volumes that prevent clearing of increasing proportions of the
lungs [215]. Mucociliary clearance is slower and less effective [222], and recovery of
mucociliary clearance after insult (typically viral infection) is slowed with age. In addition to
impaired clearance from large airways, clearance of inhaled particles from the small
conducting airways is also impaired with age [223]. This may lead to changes in the lung
microbiome as loss of diversity correlates with lower FEV in middle aged and older people
[224]. The cellular changes in the lung epithelium, especially those prompted by chronic
inflammation, lead to a thinner epithelial layer and altered receptor expression, both
increasing the risk of pneumonia [225].
The rate of decline in the peak aerobic capacity in healthy older persons with age, especially
men, is not constant. The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging found a 3 to 6 percent
decrease in peak aerobic capacity per decade in the 30s and more than 20 percent decrease
in peak aerobic capacity per decade in the 70s and beyond [226]. The decrease in FEV with
age correlates strongly with the worsening peak aerobic performance [227].
GENITOURINARY SYSTEM
Aging changes in the genitourinary system increase the older person's risk of urinary
incontinence, urinary tract infection, erectile dysfunction, and dyspareunia.
Bladder — The prevalence of urinary incontinence increases with age. Until age 80,
incontinence is more common in women than men, but the prevalence differences by sex
subside after age 80 [228]. In healthy men aged 70 to 90, peak urine flow rate was unchanged
over a five-year period while postvoid residual (PVR) bladder volume increased about 25
percent [229]. Urinary incontinence is related to decreases in detrusor muscle contractility,
maximum bladder capacity, maximum flow rate, and the ability to withhold voiding, and an
increase in PVR [230]. In cross-sectional data, the detrusor power decreased 30 percent in
1
1

-- 17 of 66 --

healthy older women; a smaller decrease was seen in men [231]. These functional changes
are due in part to decreased innervation of the detrusor muscle [232] and in part due to
changes in the brain [233]. The common triad of increased PVR, reduced ability to withhold
voiding, and nocturia have been attributed to decreased central nervous system dopamine
rather than a local bladder-centric issue [234]. (See "Urinary incontinence in males" and
"Female urinary incontinence: Evaluation".)
Beta-3 adrenergic agonists are used to reduce bladder contractions. When bladder smooth
muscle from older adults is compared with middle-aged adults, there was no alteration in
number of beta-3 receptors, but the response to CL316,243 was attenuated in the old muscle
[235]. Whether this finding is applicable to the approved beta-3 agonists like mirabegron is
unclear.
Withdrawal of estrogen in women results in decline in urethral length as well as decreased
maximal urethral closure pressure. The urethra becomes a less effective barrier from bacterial
contamination with age, especially in women [236]. Topical estrogens, especially in addition to
pelvic floor exercises, may lead to restoration of urethral function [237].
It is increasingly clear that the urinary bladder supports as rich a microbiome as the gut. The
urine is not truly sterile and, in women, the species of this microbiome are altered with
menopause [238]. Whether the bladder microbiome has causative roles in age-related
changes in bladder function is unclear.
Male reproductive system — Surveys of sexual activity among older men have found varying
rates of activity. In one multinational survey, over 80 percent of men aged 60 to 69 and 70
percent of those aged 70 to 79 reported that they were sexually active [239]. By contrast, two
representative samples from the United States found that 39 percent of men aged 75 to 85
years reported sexual activity [240]. The older penis needs greater stimulation to attain an
erection, spontaneous erections are less frequent, erections are less firm, refractory times
between erections (or ejaculations) become prolonged, and ejaculation is less forceful with
smaller ejaculate volumes. These changes are the sum of age-related neurologic, vascular,
and endocrinologic changes [241]. (See "Epidemiology and etiologies of male sexual
dysfunction".)
A gradual decline in male reproductive ability occurs with age. Germ cells are formed
continually, but sperm production decreases. The sperm from older testes have an increased
frequency of chromosomal abnormalities and impaired motility and decreased ability to
fertilize even when administered by intrauterine artificial insemination [242]. The
seminiferous tubules also degenerate and Leydig cell number decreases. Changes in the
epididymis and seminal vesicles are characterized by deposition of pigmented granules in the
epithelial walls and amyloid in the seminal vesicle wall, which may be associated with amyloid
deposition elsewhere in the body [243].

-- 18 of 66 --

Enlargement of the prostate gland occurs with age. Prostate gland hyperplasia is discussed in
detail separately. (See "Epidemiology and pathophysiology of benign prostatic hyperplasia"
and "Clinical manifestations and diagnostic evaluation of benign prostatic hyperplasia".)
Female reproductive system — The ovary ages with a decline in oocyte numbers as women
enter their late fourth decade, and menopause (amenorrhea for 12 months after the final
menstrual period) ensues at an average age of 51 years. In women of advanced age
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment (defined here as after 45), the implantation,
clinical pregnancy, and live birth rates all occur at reduced frequency [244]. Changes related
to menopause and estrogen depletion are discussed separately. (See "Menopause: Clinical
features and diagnosis".)
Once menopause has occurred, more gradual age-related postmenopausal processes are
seen. The vagina loses elasticity. The clitoris, like the older penis, needs greater stimulation
and becomes less engorged [245]. Subcutaneous fat in the pelvis is lost. Vaginal dryness and
atrophy are mostly estrogen-dependent but may be compounded by age-related diminished
blood flow to the vagina. Cervicovaginal secretions, especially during arousal, become
sparser. Vaginal pH rises, allowing colonization by enteric microflora and a loss of
lactobacillus bacteria among other changes in the microbiome correlating with a decrease in
amino acid availability in the post-menopausal vagina. The vaginal environment becomes
much more proinflammatory using both cellular and cytokine markers [246]. (See "Overview
of sexual dysfunction in females: Epidemiology, risk factors, and evaluation".)
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
Muscle — Although there is great variability, muscle mass decreases in relation to body
weight by approximately 30 to 50 percent in adults. The loss is not linear, but it accelerates
with increasing age. Sarcopenia, age-related loss of muscle mass and strength, is defined as a
decrease in appendicular muscle mass two standard deviations below the mean for young
healthy adults [247]. Sarcopenia is an independent risk factor for mortality in longitudinal
studies [248] and is found in as many as 50 percent of those over 80, depending on the
population assessed and the definition of sarcopenia applied [249].
In addition to muscle mass loss, muscle quality decreases with infiltration of fat and
connective tissue into the old muscle [250]. The presence of intramuscular and intermuscular
fat has been termed "myosteatosis." Myosteatosis at the thigh has been associated with
decreased strength, slower gait speed, and decreased survival in the AGES-Reykjavik study
[251,252]; a mortality relationship was not seen with the calf myosteatosis [253]. Critically,
myosteatosis needs to be taken in context, as exercise-trained individuals acquire muscle fat
as a ready energy supply [254], and in that setting increased muscle fat is associated with
better performance and exercise training in older people [255].

-- 19 of 66 --

The loss of muscle mass is not uniform; in general, the loss from the legs is greater than from
the arms. Type I slow-twitch fibers are less affected by age than fast-twitch fibers. The loss of
fast twitch muscle with age can be prevented by lifelong strength training, but not endurance
training [256]. In any muscle bundle, the size of the myofibrils decreases, followed by the
number of myofibrils. Innervation of skeletal muscle decreases in men over 50; the number of
motor units in any given muscle decreases with a compensatory increase in motor unit size.
While this synaptic remodeling occurs at all ages, the "new" neuromuscular innervations are
unstable [257]. An inability to finely modulate the stimulation rate may contribute to the loss
of strength [258]. Some have implicated motor neuron changes as the primary cause of
sarcopenia [259]. The loss of muscle contributes to age-related insulin resistance, age-related
changes in body composition, and volumes of distribution for water-soluble drugs.
The presence of atrophied or partially or completely denervated muscle fibers can be seen on
cross-section examination of muscle from an older person. Time to peak tension with ankle
dorsiflexion is slowed, as is time to muscle relaxation [260]. Strength also decreases
dramatically with age, partially explained by loss in muscle mass. From age 30 to age 80, a
typical person's grip strength decreases 60 percent; however, activity plays an important
mitigating role. Overall, lower-extremity strength is lost at a faster rate than upper-extremity
strength; activity may decrease the rate of decline but will not completely prevent it [250]. The
net result is that strength loss is greater than muscle mass loss, with strength loss being a
better predictor of disability and mortality [261]. The older muscle is more easily fatigued as
well [262].
The recovery of older muscle after injury is slowed, and frequently incomplete [263], perhaps
related to a defect in satellite cells' ability to repopulate muscle [264]. This satellite cell defect
is equally apparent in trained and sedentary older people [265]. Some of this impairment in
recovery is locally mediated, perhaps by nerve regeneration, as old muscles transplanted into
young animals regenerate fairly well, while muscles taken from young animals and
transplanted into old ones do not regain mass or generate force as effectively [266].
Additionally, myostatin may be increased, but no age effect on circulating myostatin levels
were seen with a highly specific assay in healthy men aged up to 85 [267]. Myostatin, a
member of the myokine family, has a potent effect to decrease muscle protein synthesis and
neutralizing antibodies to myostatin have been administered to people over 75 who were
weak and had recent falls [268]. Although the antibody increased lean body mass, there was
no effect on functional measures at 24 weeks.
Skeletal muscle from older adults shows altered energetics [269]. The decrease in enzyme
activity of glycolytic enzymes is greater than that of oxidative enzymes. Physical activity plays
a significant role in the decrease in these enzyme activities, and older adults with high
physical activity have isolated mitochondrial function that is not significantly different from
25-year-olds [270]. Similarly, the in situ, noninvasive assessment of recovery of

-- 20 of 66 --

phosphocreatine was reduced in typical older adults and was not different from the young in
the physically active older adults [270]. In older animals, an acute bout of exercise is
associated with relative hypoperfusion of the most oxidatively active exercising muscles [271].
Age-related hormonal changes in growth hormone, androgen, and possibly others may
contribute to the age-associated alterations muscle mass and function. Parabiosis studies
(where old and young syngenic mice are connected so that they share circulations) suggest
circulating factors may restore many of these age-associated decrements in muscle [272,273].
Additionally, proinflammatory cytokines increase with age and stimulate the rate of skeletal
muscle protein degradation [250]. The effects of agents that stimulate muscle growth,
especially insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), may be mediated by neuromuscular effects,
suggesting that both hormonal and neuronal approaches to preventing sarcopenia may be
efficacious [259].
Bone — Aging increases the probability of fracture and the rate of repair is slowed, once
fracture occurs. The increased proinflammatory environment in healthy older adults
promotes bone loss. Anatomically, the weightbearing cortical bones lose substance from the
endosteal surface. Computed tomography (CT) or MRI indicate that the marrow lumen of the
femur is larger, the cortex thins, and fat fills much of the marrow cavities. The aging loss of
mineral occurs in both cortical (peripheral skeleton) and trabecular (axial skeleton) bone.
Trabecular number decreases and the distance between trabeculae increases with age in
healthy aging women [274]. There is a progressive decline in osteoblast number and activity,
but osteoclasts remain unchanged with age. Precursor cells for osteoblasts remain constant
in number after age 30, but their function declines [275], with an enhanced tendency to
become adipocytes rather than bone forming [276]. Whether or not the fundamental defect is
in the bone marrow microenvironment or the precursor cells themselves remains uncertain
[277].
Overall, the decline in bone mass is approximately 0.5 percent per year in healthy older
people [278]. Age-related changes in women are compounded by menopausal changes in
bone mass and function. Vitamin D deficiency including the impaired 1-alpha-hydroxylation of
vitamin D by the aging kidney, common in older people, further accelerates bone loss.
Perhaps because of shared mechanisms, osteoporosis and sarcopenia occur together with
high frequency [279]. Their cooccurrence, osteosarcopenia, is increasingly recognized in older
adult populations. Weightbearing exercise (walking) appears to have beneficial impact on
both, but walking plus resistance exercise had a greater benefit [280]. (See "Pathogenesis of
osteoporosis".)
Weightbearing exercise is frequently reduced in older adults, contributing to a negative
calcium balance and loss of bone mineral [281]. Increasing weightbearing time or increasing
loading forces may increase bone mineral and prevent age-related bone loss [282].

-- 21 of 66 --

Bones from older adults have microanatomical changes that make them weaker than the
amount of mineralization would predict. These changes include widening of the Haversian
canals and thinning of the osteon wall [283]. Once bones fracture, the repair mechanisms are
also impaired in aging. In older animals, fractures produce less local blood vessel formation
and less osteogenic differentiation of progenitor cells and require at least twice as long to
regain prefracture biomechanical properties, including strength, than in younger adult
animals [284]. Cells isolated from old bones are less responsive to vitamin D than young ones.
The matrix in old individuals may stimulate less bone formation than that of younger people.
This suggests that growth factors (eg, IGF-1) may be deficient or inhibitory factors may be
present in the old matrix. Supplementation with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
parathyroid hormone, vitamin D and calcium, statins, and some of the bone morphogenic
proteins have all shown promise in facilitating bone healing in various experimental
paradigms [285]. This is true not only for clinically apparent fractures but also for the micro-
cracks (microscopic disruptions in mineral or organic matrix), which increase dramatically with
age. This micro-damage stimulates the repair mechanisms and further accentuates the age-
related imbalance between bone deposition and resorption [286]. The microdefects may also
make bone weaker than would be expected from just the bone density [287].
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Anatomical and physiologic changes — The volume of the brain decreases approximately 7
cm per year after age 65, with greatest loss in the frontal and temporal lobes [288] and
greater loss of white matter than grey matter in cognitively normal older adults [289].
Cerebral blood flow decreases heterogeneously by 5 to 20 percent, with deterioration of
mechanisms that maintain cerebral blood flow with fluctuation in blood pressure [290]. In
addition to older age, males have higher cerebrovascular impedance measured noninvasively,
which may promote brain hypoperfusion [291].
Age-related neuronal loss is most prominent in the largest neurons in the cerebellum and
cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus, the pons [292], and the medulla [293,294] have modest if
any neuron or volume losses with normal aging. Age-related neuron dropout is likely due to
apoptosis (ie, programmed cell death) rather than inflammation, ischemia, or another
mechanism [295]. Age also affects neurons that persist, with loss of the dendritic tree,
shrinkage of processes, and decrease of synapses [296]. Such changes may contribute more
to the age-related loss of brain volume than the loss of neurons. In some areas, however, the
dendritic connections may increase, perhaps as a result of repatterning of the brain invoked
to compensate for cellular dropout. Neurons continue to form new synapses, and new
neurons are formed throughout the lifespan, but the rates of loss are greater than the gains
[297].
3

-- 22 of 66 --

Lipofuscin accumulates in certain areas of the brain, particularly the hippocampus and frontal
cortex, but the impact of lipofuscin on function is unknown [298]. Neurofibrillary tangles and
senile plaques occur in certain areas of the brain in normal aging but to a lesser extent than
in Alzheimer disease. More than 50 percent of cognitively normal individuals over age 85 have
sufficient plaques/tangle burden to make a pathologic diagnosis of Alzheimer disease [299].
Thus, interpretation of beta amyloid seen on amyloid imaging in individuals of advanced age
poses a challenge [300]. Similar issues may be raised for tau imaging [301]. For both beta
amyloid and tau, there were thought to be brain regions where their accumulation started
but, with more recent studies, there is evidence of multiple brain regions with tau and beta
amyloid signals in cognitively unimpaired older adults, correlating with age more than
cognition [302].
Multiple nonhomogenous changes in brain enzymes, receptors, and neurotransmitters occur
with age. Acetylcholine availability decreases due to decrease in cholinergic and muscarinic
neurons, and reduced release and synthesis of acetylcholine [296,303]. As well, dopamine and
corresponding receptors in the striatum and substantia nigra may be decreased in normal
aging [304]. Interestingly, dopamine may facilitate episodic memory persistence [305], and
providing dopamine as L-DOPA to normal old brains can improve performance on some
cognitive tasks [306].
Age-related changes seen on functional brain scanning with fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET) are heterogeneous [307]. For many tasks, the old brain
seems to work harder than the young one, recruiting more neurons and with higher
energetic expense as shown by PET scan [308]. For a simple recall test of letters, a greater
volume of activation was seen in old brains. The amount of brain activated for a given task,
including bilateral activation, may be an insight into cognitive reserve, brain vulnerability, and
tradeoffs in efficiency made to maintain cognitive function with age.
Brain connectivity, as assessed with functional MRI, is altered by normal aging. The default
mode network is modified so that the connections are less robust but are still greater than
the changes seen in Alzheimer disease [309]. In the absence of disease, the loss of default
mode connectivity is associated with decreased memory performance [310]. In contrast to the
decreased within-network connectivity, there is increased between-network connectivity
which may contribute to decreased efficiency [311].
Cognitive and behavioral changes associated with normal aging — Certain memory
performances on cognitive testing, like procedural, primary, and semantic memory, are well
preserved with age [312]. Skills, ability, and knowledge that are overlearned, well-practiced,
and familiar, like vocabulary or general knowledge, remain stable or improve up to 0.2
standard deviations per decade through the seventh decades, but even these processes can
begin to decrease with further aging [313]. Older people may be more accurate in judging

-- 23 of 66 --

distances than younger people [314]. The ability to recognize familiar objects and faces, as
well as to maintain appropriate visual perception of objects, remains stable over the lifetime.
Episodic and working memory and executive function are the specific domains of cognition
most affected by "normal" aging [315]. These are late-life changes, occurring after the sixth
decade, and have a linear or accelerating decline with further aging [316]. Processing speed
decreases with age and can have a global effect on the testing performance of other
neurocognitive domains in any timed test [317]. This may contribute to the slower speech
production of older adults [318].
Executive function, the higher-level organizational abilities such as planning, monitoring,
inhibition, and control of action, is critical to engagement in purposeful, independent, and
self-preserving behavior and is necessary for an older person to successfully manage their
own medical illnesses. Executive function declines with age and more dramatically after age
70 [319].
Attention span decreases with even simple attentive tasks [320]. In particular, there is a
decrease in the ability to focus on a task in a busy environment and the ability to perform
multiple tasks at one time [319]. For example, asking an older person to say the alphabet or
count backwards slows their gait speed by 10 to 20 percent and may increase their fall risk
[321]. These impairments, similar to processing speed, may lead to decreased testing
performance in other neurocognitive domains.
Problem-solving, reasoning about unfamiliar things, processing and learning new
information, and attending to and manipulating one's environment show a steady decline (by
approximately -0.02 standard deviations per year) after peaking around age 30. Language
abilities (verbal fluency and the ability to name objects) demonstrate some late-life decline,
particularly after age 70.
The magnitude of aging is tempered by the effects of social deprivation, environmental
changes, smoking, alcohol, education, and other aspects of the exposome [322]. One of the
less recognized is the effect of sleep on long-term cognition [323]. An article studied a
Scottish population in Lothian, retesting them at age 70 on tests that they took as 11- or 12-
year-olds. The comparison of their young age scores with those more than 50 years later are
shown in the brush plot [324]. A sizeable minority scored better than they did when they were
younger, but the heterogeneity is great.
Despite measurable changes seen on cognitive testing with normal cognitive aging, the
successfully aging 95-year-old individual remains able to function in society, the workplace,
and/or at home. Few real-life situations require performance at maximum levels, especially
with time pressure or acquired knowledge. The impact of cognitive loss can often be
compensated by noncognitive factors that do not decline with age [313].

-- 24 of 66 --

Cognitive retraining — Novel neural challenges increase recruitment of additional brain
regions in young healthy subjects; with repetition of the challenge, recruitment of these brain
regions subsides and activity is seen in skill-specific regions [325-327]. Neural recruitment in
the aging brain is used to accomplish less novel tasks. This process, referred to as
"compensatory scaffolding," may be a strategy the brain uses to maintain function and
cognition [328].
Repeated use of "compensatory scaffolding" by engaging in social, leisure, and cognitive
activities (learning a new language, pursuing higher education) may decrease the risk of
Alzheimer disease or delay its onset [329] and slow the progress of normal aging changes
[330]. Specifically designed cognitive training activities for older adults have also been shown
to decrease decline in ability to perform instrumental activities of daily living, per subject self-
reports compared with controls [331]. In healthy volunteers, cognitive training can lead to
gray matter volume increases in the "exercised" areas [332]. Whether these efforts improve
compensation or prevent age-related decline in neurologic processes is uncertain.
SKIN
The normal aging of the skin leads to atrophy, decreased elasticity, and impaired metabolic
and reparative responses. These changes are separate from those due to sun exposure, so-
called "photoaging."
The epidermis becomes thinner, and the dermoepidermal junction flattens, resulting in
increased fragility of the skin to shear stress [333]. Removing an adhesive dressing from an
older person may dislodge the epidermis because the dermoepidermal junction is weaker
than the bond between the skin and the dressing. Bleeding into the space between the
dermis and epidermis occurs more frequently.
Loss of undulations at the dermoepidermal junction decreases the area available for nutrient
transfer, including protective lipids in the stratum corneum. This results in dry skin (xerosis)
and a compromise in the barrier function of the skin [334]. Epidermal turnover is slowed due
to decreased division of keratinocytes and longer migration from the basal layer to the skin
surface [335]. The epidermal cellular composition changes, with decreases in melanocytes
and immunologically active Langerhans cells, and a 50 percent overall reduction in nail
growth and reductions in sweat and sebaceous gland activity [336].
Additional changes associated with age rather than sun damage include the following:
The dermis thins with decrease in vascularity and in the biosynthetic capacity of the
resident fibroblasts [337]. These changes contribute to delayed wound healing. The amount
of dermal collagen may be decreased by 75 percent with age [338], and the remaining
collagen is fragmented and disarrayed.
●

-- 25 of 66 --

Topical administration of all-trans-retinoic acid (tretinoin) appears to reverse many of the age-
related changes in sun-protected skin (inner thigh). After nine months of daily treatment with
topical tretinoin cream 0.025 percent, the epidermis thickens, rete ridges become deeper,
capillaries reappear, matrix proteins are redeposited, and collagen and elastin increased
[352]. Thus, these age-related changes appear to be mutable.
The skin has its own microbiome with diversity in part dictated by the immune system,
moisture, and sebum production. In older women, the diversity was greater than those 21 to
37 for the cheek and forehead [353]. The dominant organisms change as well, with older
individuals having less Propionibacterium, for example.
Photoaging is the result of chronic sun exposure and recurrent damage by the sun's
ultraviolet light. Photoaging, not physiologic aging, produces most of the cosmetically
The elastic fiber network degenerates as elastin biosynthesis declines significantly after the
fourth decade. Elastin fibers in aging abdominal skin are reduced in number, fiber diameter,
volume fraction, and network connectivity [339]. Changes in the glycosaminoglycan
macromolecules in the dermis lead to loss of hydration and decreased skin resilience [340].
●
The ability to deliver heat to the skin for excretion is impaired, especially during exercise
[341]. With the loss of rete pegs at the dermoepidermal junction and loss of dermal
capillarity, the area for heat transfer to the epidermis is decreased. Loss of subdermal fat
decreases insulation and the ability of older people to conserve heat. Tonic vasoconstriction
in many older adults, as well as decreases in the amount of sweat produced by sweat
glands and higher core temperature before sweat is produced, all contributing to impaired
thermoregulation with age [342-344].
●
Sensory perception of the skin decreases, particularly in the lower extremities [345].
Decreased sensation involves both touch, due to decreased Meissner's corpuscles [346],
and low-frequency vibration, mediated by the Pacinian corpuscles [347].
●
The skin plays a critical role in vitamin D synthesis. Ultraviolet rays convert 7-
dehydrocholesterol to pre-vitamin D3 in the epidermis. Levels of 7-dehydrocholesterol
decreased with age, thus decreasing the older person's capacity for vitamin D synthesis
[348].
●
Senescent cells accumulate in the skin of older people [349].	●
The microbiome of the skin changes with age such that increased diversity is seen on the
older skin [338] and age can be predicted from the microbiome with a mean absolute error
of about five years [350].
●
There is a decrease in subdermal fat. This loss of support contributes to the skin wrinkling
and sagging as well as to increased susceptibility to trauma [351].
●

-- 26 of 66 --

undesirable changes in skin. Cellular dysplasia, atypical cells, a loss of polarity of the
keratinocytes, and a significant disorganization in the epidermis are the result of photoaging.
In the dermis, photoaging leads to elastosis, aggregates of amorphous elastic fibers, a
decrease in collagen content, an increase in glycosaminoglycans, and a modest inflammatory
infiltrate localized to the perivascular areas. The photoaged skin looks wrinkled, lax, yellowed,
rough, and sometimes leathery. Photoaged skin has a higher tendency toward
telangiectasias, and it is spottily hyperpigmented and hypopigmented. Photoaging changes
are also partially reversible by topical treatment with retinoic acid.
SENSORY SYSTEM
Eye — The structure of the eye changes with age. Periorbital tissues atrophy; eyelids become
more relaxed. The lower lid flaccidity may lead to ectropion (eyelid turns outward) or
entropion (eyelid turns inward). Lacrimal gland function, tear production, and goblet cell
function all decrease [354]. Even though tear production decreases, watering eyes becomes
more common because tissue atrophy leads to displacement of the lacrimal punctum and
less effective drainage.
The conjunctiva atrophies and yellows. The sensitivity of the cornea to touch declines by 50
percent. Deposition of cholesterol esters, cholesterol, and neutral fat in the cornea causes
arcus senilis, an annular yellow-white deposit on the peripheral cornea. The presence of arcus
senilis correlated with shorter lifespans in women in the Copenhagen City Heart Study [355].
The iris becomes more rigid, yielding a smaller, more sluggishly responsive pupil. The lens
yellows, in part because of photo-oxidation in lens protein and an accumulation of insoluble
protein. The yellowing of the lens causes decreased transmission of blue light [356].
Production of aqueous humor decreases and the vitreous humor and body also shrink.
Separation between the liquid and solid components of the vitreous may be due to collagen
changes and manifest as flashes of light [357]. The retina becomes thinner because of a loss
of neurons. The retina may also become more inflammatory with increasing infiltration of
macrophages and activation of glia cells [358]. Retinal blood flow also decreases with age in
healthy adults over 65 by 20 percent compared with younger adults [359]. The relationship
between the blood flow and the loss of neurons is unclear.
The changes in lens and iris lead to "presbyopia." The distance needed to focus near objects
increases because of decreased lens elasticity and, to a lesser extent, weakening and loss of
an effective angle of the ciliary muscle [360]. Presbyopia has gradual onset in the fourth
decade with steady deterioration in static acuity (object at rest) and a more pronounced loss
of dynamic visual acuity (ie, objects in motion). (See "Visual impairment in adults: Refractive
disorders and presbyopia".)

-- 27 of 66 --

The older eye adapts more slowly to changes in lighting conditions; the pupil becomes rigid
and the lens more opaque. The rate of synthesis of photopigment slows with age, adding to
slowed adaptation to lower light conditions [361]. The absorption of photons by
photoreceptors is also decreased with age [362]. The retina becomes thinner, especially in the
retinal nerve fiber layer. By contrast, the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) thickens with age
[363]. Lens alterations increase light scattering, making the older person more sensitive to
glare. After lens removal, the glare threshold becomes normal.
Finally, contrast sensitivity declines, so older persons need increased color contrast to
discriminate between target and background. This factor should be taken into account in the
design of living environments.
Hearing — Age-related changes in the auditory system produce decrements in high-
frequency hearing acuity and impaired speech recognition in noisy environments. The loss of
hearing acuity may result in social isolation and increases risk for delirium during
hospitalization, but there is uncertainty about the risk of dementia [364,365]. The cumulative
effects of environmental or occupational noise confound interpretation of age effects. (See
"Etiology of hearing loss in adults".)
With age, the walls of the external auditory canal thin. The cerumen becomes drier and more
tenacious, increasing the risk of cerumen impaction in older people. Although the ossicular
joints degenerate with age, sound transmission by the ossicles is well preserved.
The inner ear experiences at least five distinct changes that occur to varying degrees:
Which of these five changes is dominant will define subgroups of age-related hearing. The net
results are loss of hearing acuity, especially at higher frequencies (presbycusis); difficulty with
speech discrimination; and problems localizing the sources of sound [366,367].
Some older individuals who say they cannot hear in fact are having difficulty understanding
what is said. Many of the consonant sounds are in the higher frequencies (t, k, ch), and
patients may not comprehend speech if they cannot appreciate those sounds. Strategically
and practically, it may be better to rephrase a question that is not understood by an older
person rather than repeat it in a louder voice, especially because pitch (frequency) is often
raised when volume is increased. Additionally, older people may have difficulty discriminating
target sound from background noise, adding to challenges of communicating in social
Hair cells in the organ of Corti are lost, initially affecting those in the basal end of the
cochlea that respond to the highest frequencies
●
Neurons innervating the cochlear and in the auditory centers of the brain are lost	●
The basilar membrane underlying the sensory apparatus stiffens and may calcify	●
The capillaries of the stria vascularis (the source of endolymph) thicken	●
The spiral ligament degenerates	●

-- 28 of 66 --

situations or noisy emergency departments [368]. In these patients, amplification of sound
alone is not effective because both target and background are amplified. Finally, as hearing
relies so much on cognitive processing, older adults, when they have their hearing restored
(by cochlear implant), have initial gains but are less likely to have the subsequent gains in
speech recognition that younger adults experience. This is attributed to a lack of neural
plasticity [369]. Despite that, a small prospective study found that after cochlear implant, 38
percent of older adults with mild cognitive impairment improved and no longer tested as
cognitively impaired [370].
Taste and smell — There are visible changes in the taste buds with age, though they have
modest impact on the sense. Although the number of papillae on the tongue decreases with
aging, neurophysiologic responses of individual papillae are minimally altered, and there is no
relation between gustatory acuity and number of taste buds.
Loss of taste in older patients is in large part due to decreased olfaction rather than taste
itself [40]. However, taste sensitivity also decreases with age, as shown by a study in which
older patients required 30 percent higher concentrations of aspartame to detect this artificial
sweetener [371,372].
Similarly, more salt (two- to threefold) needs to be added to tomato soup before it can be
appreciated by an older person [373]. The effects of age on the tongue need not be uniform,
with regions of deficient gustatory sense becoming more common with age.
The acuity of olfaction declines significantly with age. Detection thresholds are increased by
more than 50 percent in healthy people by age 80; recognition of familiar smells decreases
similarly, including the recognition of spoiled food and of a gas stove left on. The decrease in
olfactory acuity after exposure to an odorant (habituation) is prolonged and of greater extent
in older adults [374]. The cause of the decreased olfactory sense is unclear, but the sensation
area decreases, the number of sensing neurons decreases, and the ability of the older person
to replenish dying olfactory receptor neurons is compromised [373].
Decreased taste and smell sensation may result in decreased enjoyment of food and an age-
related difficulty in sorting tastes of mixed or combined foods. The role of olfaction in
maintaining appetite is critical; for example, some people with anosmia forget to eat. This is
especially important because the sensation of hunger after an overnight fast is roughly 25
percent lower in older adults than in young adults [375].
IMMUNE SYSTEM
Of all the changes that occur with age, decrements in immune functions are among the most
critical, contributing to the increased frequency of infections, malignancies, and autoimmune

-- 29 of 66 --

disorders. These changes are mentioned briefly here and reviewed in more detail separately.
(See "Immune function in older adults".)
Immunosenescence, or the aging of the immune system, does not impact all immune
processes equally. Some of the responses that are most affected by age include the ability of
lymphocytes (both B and T cells) to work in concert to generate effective immune responses
upon exposure to new antigens, in the form of either infections or vaccinations.
An important concept in immunosenescence is that of loss of precise regulation of
inflammatory processes. Older adults display cytokine profiles that are consistent with a
chronic, low-level inflammatory state, which is sometimes referred to as "inflammaging"
[376]. This chronic low-grade inflammatory state contributes to age-associated morbidity and
mortality and many of the age-related changes described above. (See "Immune function in
older adults".)
MOLECULAR BASIS OF AGING
The molecular basis for age-related physiologic changes is a subject of intense active
investigation. The process of natural selection (in which genes that promote beneficial
conditions in early or reproductive years are selected for, and genes associated with harmful
conditions are selected against), does not play a significant role in later life. Despite the lack of
selection for late-life genes, some processes that may provide benefit early in life could be
detrimental later in life, so-called antagonist pleiotropy.
For more than 50 years, the most robust means to increase survival and modify many age-
related changes was to use caloric restriction. Reducing caloric intake by 20 to 40 percent in
some of the most common strains of laboratory mice and rats increased median and
maximum lifespan by 20 to 50 percent but did not increase survival in approximately 50
percent of tested mouse strains [377]. Studies with nonhuman primates have been less
promising, and, despite having lower cholesterol, better insulin sensitivity, etc, survival has
not been increased in one primate study and not another, leading to the conclusion that
dietary composition is an additional critical factor [378-380].
Several findings suggest that shortening of the telomere (nucleoprotein end caps on
chromosomes) is involved in increased vulnerability of aging cells to DNA damage and
dysregulation [381-383]. The shortened telomeres, as well as other replicative dysregulation,
may lead to inadequate replacement of damaged or dead cells from their respective
precursor cell populations. Interestingly, many of these resting precursors cells start to
differentiate along adipocyte-like pathways, rather than into other tissue types [18].
Subpopulations of adipocytes, hepatocytes, fibroblasts, and other cells may enter senescence
with aging and develop the senescence associated secretory phenotype (SASP) [384]. SASP

-- 30 of 66 --

cells have the potential to release proinflammatory cytokines and other potentially harmful
factors as well as modify the activity of local normal cells [385]. The SASP may contribute to
"inflammaging" [386]. Agents that kill the senescent cells (senolytics) or attenuate their
adverse effects ("senomorphics") improve various aspects of aging in animal models and early
studies in humans [387,388]. T cells have been engineered to target and destroy senescent
cells [389]. Other hypotheses implicate the p53 gene that is activated when DNA is damaged.
This gene activation may mediate several molecular processes affecting cell function and
viability: normal cell growth and division is halted, with apoptosis for cells that rapidly
turnover; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivators PGC 	and
PGC 	are repressed and lead to loss of muscle mitochondria and buildup of free radicals
with loss of antioxidant defenses [390]. Importantly, replicative senescence is not the only nor
even dominant path to senescence; chromosomal damage and certain signaling pathways
lead to senescent cells that may have relatively long telomeres.
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway regulates nutrient distribution and is
believed to play an important role in the ability of caloric restriction to extend lifespan.
Rapamycin has been shown to produce longevity in mice [391].
The processes common to aging in people as well as animal models have been called the
pillars or hallmarks of aging [392]. Lopez-Otin expanded the hallmarks to 12: genomic
instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, disabled
macroautophagy, deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular
senescence, stem cell exhaustion, altered intercellular communication, chronic inflammation,
and dysbiosis. This has allowed researchers to organize their approaches with the expectation
that modifying one pillar will have a multitude of effects across the other pillars. As an
example, most cardiovascular diseases of the older adult have strong association with
abnormalities or dysfunction for every one of the pillars of aging [393].
LONGEVITY
Longevity predictions are important in many aspects of medical care. Limited survival will
impact the benefits of initiating medications or performing procedures or screening tests.
Decision-making regarding the appropriateness of a specific intervention (eg, "Should this
older person be given a bisphosphonate to prevent osteoporosis?") requires recognition of
both the likely survival time for an individual and how long it may take for the intervention to
have effect.
One classic study provides survival data on individuals in the United States, stratified into
quartiles by survival for each five-year period above age 65 years [394]. The absence of
significant comorbid conditions, or the presence of superior functional status for age,
identifies older adults who are likely to live longer than average. Conversely, individuals with
1-alpha
1-beta

-- 31 of 66 --

functional dependencies in activities of daily living and/or significant comorbidity (eg, heart
failure, end-stage kidney disease, oxygen-dependent chronic obstructive lung disease) have a
life expectancy substantially below the average for their age.
Age-related modification of risk-benefit
relationships has broad applicability. In addition to
the documentation of the broad range of life
expectancy for a given age, a table has been
developed to measure the likely benefit against the
potential risk ( table 2).
For example, a typical 85-year-old man who has a
symptomatic inguinal hernia is likely to have the
problem for another 4.7 years and thus may
warrant a discussion of surgical repair. Note that
the tables are based on a United States White
population and may not be generalizable to other
groups. Also, the tables do not account quality of
life for the specified years. Both of these issues may critically modify the interpretation of the
tabular data. These concepts are integrated into tools at "eprognosis," which makes the data
more specific to the individual [395].
Successful aging — The term "successful aging" is used to identify older individuals who are
free from chronic disease and continue to function well into old age, both physically and
cognitively. The term "essentially healthy" identifies those with no acute disease, no recent
history of cancer, and well-controlled chronic disease. "Exceptionally healthy" identifies older
adults who take no medications, have no chronic disease, are normotensive, and have a
normal body weight. Psychosocial and genetic factors contribute to successful aging as well
as longevity.
Predictors of high functional status in both physical and cognitive domains were evaluated in
the longitudinal Cardiovascular Health Study, following 1677 participants for 14 years (median
age 85, range 77 to 102, at study endpoint) [396]. Although all participants showed functional
decline over time, 53 percent remained functionally intact, and this group had a higher
baseline health profile and lower vascular disease risk. Greater physical impairment was
found in women and in those with greater weight. Cardiovascular disease and hypertension
were predictors for both cognitive and physical impairment.
In another longitudinal study of nearly 6000 British civil service employees followed for 17
years, successful aging was identified in 12.8 percent of men and 14.6 percent of women at
follow-up [397]. The strongest predictor of successful aging was socioeconomic status at
Life expectancy by age
Table 2 - larger image below

-- 32 of 66 --

midlife. After adjustment for socioeconomics, not smoking, diet, exercise, moderate alcohol
intake (in women), and work support (in men) predicted healthy aging.
The effect of genetics on longevity and life expectancy has been explored in observational
studies and in animal experiments. As noted above, twin studies suggest that 25 percent of
longevity is genetic [3]. However, the importance of genetics is substantially larger at the
extremes of longevity and may be greater for men than for women. In the New England
Centenarian Study, male siblings of centenarians had a 17 times greater chance of living to
age 100 compared with birth cohorts, compared with eight times greater for females [398].
A polymorphism in the Cholesterol Ester Transfer Protein gene has been identified that is
associated with successful aging, increased longevity, preserved cognition, less cardiovascular
disease, and larger-sized high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles in Ashkenazi Jews [399].
Animal models suggest the potential for gene manipulation to prolong longevity. For
example, the median and maximum survival of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans can be
increased threefold by mutating the daf-16 gene, a key regulator of insulin/insulin-like growth
factor (IGF)-like pathways in the worm [400].
Environmental factors are likely to interact with genetics. In Italy, the ratio of female to male
centenarians is quite variable, ranging from 2:1 in Sardinia to 7:1 in Northern Italy, suggesting
a gene-environment interaction [401]. Okinawa, Japan has the highest concentration of
centenarians in the world. The longevity there has been attributed to a "caloric restriction with
optimal nutrition" diet, similar to diets that increase longevity by 50 percent in mice and rats
[402]. A genetic component is also possible, based on family studies of Okinawan
centenarians [403]. Extreme female longevity may be less dependent on genetics than male
longevity and more related to a healthier lifestyle and more favorable environmental
conditions [401].
The heterogeneity of older people is remarkable and important to consider when reading this
chapter. The rates of changes and compensations for the multitude of processes altered by
aging are very variable, and, similarly, the extents and interactions of the pillars of aging are
also variable. The classic saying "when you have seen one 85-year-old, you have seen one 85-
year-old" encapsulates that variability.
Finally, one reason for the heterogeneity described above is the differences in aging between
males and females. This has been underemphasized in this chapter for brevity, but, at least
for cardiovascular aging, there are important and fundamental differences between aging in
males and in females [404]. The differences lead to heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction being a much greater risk for females. Similarly, for agents given to mice to increase
their longevity, many of them have had sex specificity, increasing survival of males, not
females, and vice versa [405,406]. The mechanisms and implications of these differences need
to be addressed.

-- 33 of 66 --

INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS
UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the
Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5 to 6
grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have
about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and
who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are
longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10 to 12
grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are
comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to
print or e-mail these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on
a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
th 	th
th 	th
Basics topic (see "Patient education: Sex as you get older (The Basics)")	●
Physiologic changes – Aging, characterized by progressive changes associated with
increased susceptibility to many diseases, is influenced by genetic factors, lifestyle choices,
and environmental exposures. Several overarching physiologic principles characterize
aging: loss of complexity as seen in less variability in heart rate responses, altered circadian
patterns, and loss of physiologic reserves needed to cope with challenges to homeostasis.
(See 'Age-associated physiologic changes' above.)
●
Hematopoietic system – Functional bone marrow reserves are reduced, with delayed
response to blood loss or hypoxia. White blood cell function is impaired and myelotoxicity
from chemotherapy is often increased. Advancing age leads to a procoagulant state, with
increased platelet responsiveness and levels of clotting factors. (See 'Hematopoietic
system' above.)
•
Gastrointestinal system – Reflux esophagitis, due to altered contractions and sphincter
tone, is common with age and may affect nutrition. Helicobacter pylori infection is
common, and sensitivity to gastric irritants such as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) is increased. Colonic changes include motility changes resulting in constipation,
decreased visceral response to bowel perforation or ischemia, colon diverticula, and
increased risk for colon cancer. (See 'Gastrointestinal tract' above.)
•
Renal system – Kidney mass and function decline, with decrease in creatinine clearance
and ability to maximally dilute urine or excrete an acid load. The older kidney is more
•

-- 34 of 66 --

prone to nephrotoxicity related to medications or intravenous contrast. (See 'Renal
system' above.)
Cardiovascular system – It is difficult to isolate the impact of age alone on the
cardiovascular system, since age increases risk for hypertension, coronary artery disease,
and a more sedentary lifestyle. There is an age-related decrease in maximum heart rate,
as well as the compensatory response of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) to
exercise. The annulus of both the aortic and mitral valve thicken, with development of
valvular calcific deposits. (See 'Cardiovascular system' above.)
•
Respiratory system – Approximately one-third of surface area per volume of lung tissue
is lost over the lifespan, with increase in anatomic dead space increases and decrease in
functional reserves. Age increases the alveolar-arterial (A-a) oxygen gradient, more
marked in the supine than sitting position. Cough is less vigorous in the older person and
mucociliary clearance is slower. (See 'Respiratory system' above.)
•
Genitourinary system – Aging changes in the genitourinary system increase the older
person's risk of urinary incontinence, urinary tract infection, erectile dysfunction, and
dyspareunia. (See 'Genitourinary system' above.)
•
Musculoskeletal system – With aging, muscle mass decreases in relation to body
weight, leading to impaired motility and balance, as well as age-related increased insulin
resistance and changes in the volume of distribution for water soluble drugs. Aging
increases the probability of fracture and slows the rate of fracture repair. Increasing
weightbearing may increase bone mineral and prevent age-related bone loss. (See
'Musculoskeletal system' above.)
•
Skin – The normal aging of the skin leads to atrophy, decreased elasticity, and impaired
metabolic and reparative responses. Photoaging, not physiologic aging, produces 90
percent of the cosmetically undesirable changes in skin. (See 'Skin' above.)
•
Sensory system – Presbyopia is due to age-related changes in the lens and iris. Age-
related changes in the auditory system produce decrements in high-frequency hearing
acuity and impaired speech recognition in noisy environments. Loss of taste in older
patients is in large part due to decreased olfaction rather than taste itself. Decreased
taste and smell sensation may result in decreased enjoyment of food and result in
nutritional deficiencies. (See 'Sensory system' above.)
•
Immune function – Decrements in immune functions with aging are among the most
critical changes, contributing to the increased frequency of infections, and malignancies.
Immunosenescence is associated with loss of regulation of inflammatory processes.
Older adults display cytokine profiles that are consistent with a chronic, low-level
•

-- 35 of 66 --

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to acknowledge the input of Nicolin Neal, MD, in the preparation of sections in this
topic content.
Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES
1. Blokzijl F, de Ligt J, Jager M, et al. Tissue-specific mutation accumulation in human adult
stem cells during life. Nature 2016; 538:260.
2. Slieker RC, Relton CL, Gaunt TR, et al. Age-related DNA methylation changes are tissue-
specific with ELOVL2 promoter methylation as exception. Epigenetics Chromatin 2018;
11:25.
3. vB Hjelmborg J, Iachine I, Skytthe A, et al. Genetic influence on human lifespan and
longevity. Hum Genet 2006; 119:312.
4. Veldhuis JD. Altered pulsatile and coordinate secretion of pituitary hormones in aging:
evidence of feedback disruption. Aging (Milano) 1997; 9:19.
5. Van Cauter E, Leproult R, Kupfer DJ. Effects of gender and age on the levels and circadian
rhythmicity of plasma cortisol. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996; 81:2468.
6. Hofman MA, Swaab DF. Living by the clock: the circadian pacemaker in older people.
Ageing Res Rev 2006; 5:33.
7. Lipsitz LA, Goldberger AL. Loss of 'complexity' and aging. Potential applications of fractals
and chaos theory to senescence. JAMA 1992; 267:1806.
8. Galetta F, Franzoni F, Femia FR, et al. Lifelong physical training prevents the age-related
impairment of heart rate variability and exercise capacity in elderly people. J Sports Med
Phys Fitness 2005; 45:217.
9. Cowdry EV. Problems of ageing: biological and medical aspects, 2nd ed, Williams & Wilkin
s, Baltimore 1942.
10. Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, Zimmerman JE. APACHE II: a severity of disease
classification system. Crit Care Med 1985; 13:818.
11. Knaus WA, Wagner DP, Draper EA, et al. The APACHE III prognostic system. Risk
prediction of hospital mortality for critically ill hospitalized adults. Chest 1991; 100:1619.
inflammatory state, sometimes referred to as "inflammaging." (See "Immune function in
older adults".)

-- 36 of 66 --

12. Beer RJ, Teasdale TA, Ghusn HF, Taffet GE. Estimation of severity of illness with APACHE II:
age-related implications in cardiac arrest outcomes. Resuscitation 1994; 27:189.
13. Rockwood K, Song X, Mitnitski A. Changes in relative fitness and frailty across the adult
lifespan: evidence from the Canadian National Population Health Survey. CMAJ 2011;
183:E487.
14. Romero-Ortuno R, Wallis S, Biram R, Keevil V. Clinical frailty adds to acute illness severity
in predicting mortality in hospitalized older adults: An observational study. Eur J Intern
Med 2016; 35:24.
15. Whitson HE, Cohen HJ, Schmader KE, et al. Physical Resilience: Not Simply the Opposite of
Frailty. J Am Geriatr Soc 2018; 66:1459.
16. Shen X, Wang C, Zhou X, et al. Nonlinear dynamics of multi-omics profiles during human
aging. Nat Aging 2024; 4:1619.
17. Sansoni P, Cossarizza A, Brianti V, et al. Lymphocyte subsets and natural killer cell activity
in healthy old people and centenarians. Blood 1993; 82:2767.
18. Kirkland JL, Tchkonia T, Pirtskhalava T, et al. Adipogenesis and aging: does aging make fat
go MAD? Exp Gerontol 2002; 37:757.
19. French RA, Broussard SR, Meier WA, et al. Age-associated loss of bone marrow
hematopoietic cells is reversed by GH and accompanies thymic reconstitution.
Endocrinology 2002; 143:690.
20. Tuljapurkar SR, McGuire TR, Brusnahan SK, et al. Changes in human bone marrow fat
content associated with changes in hematopoietic stem cell numbers and cytokine levels
with aging. J Anat 2011; 219:574.
21. Artz AS. From biology to clinical practice: aging and hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2012; 18:S40.
22. Boggs DR, Patrene KD. Hematopoiesis and aging III: Anemia and a blunted erythropoietic
response to hemorrhage in aged mice. Am J Hematol 1985; 19:327.
23. Albright JW, Makinodan T. Decline in the growth potential of spleen-colonizing bone
marrow stem cells of long-lived aging mice. J Exp Med 1976; 144:1204.
24. Lipschitz DA, Udupa KB, Milton KY, Thompson CO. Effect of age on hematopoiesis in man.
Blood 1984; 63:502.
25. Bagnara GP, Bonsi L, Strippoli P, et al. Hemopoiesis in healthy old people and
centenarians: well-maintained responsiveness of CD34+ cells to hemopoietic growth
factors and remodeling of cytokine network. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2000; 55:B61.
26. Shlush LI. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis. Blood 2018; 131:496.
27. Buscarlet M, Provost S, Zada YF, et al. DNMT3A and TET2 dominate clonal hematopoiesis
and demonstrate benign phenotypes and different genetic predispositions. Blood 2017;

-- 37 of 66 --

130:753.
28. Jaiswal S, Fontanillas P, Flannick J, et al. Age-related clonal hematopoiesis associated with
adverse outcomes. N Engl J Med 2014; 371:2488.
29. Forsberg LA, Rasi C, Malmqvist N, et al. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y in peripheral blood
is associated with shorter survival and higher risk of cancer. Nat Genet 2014; 46:624.
30. Forsberg LA, Halvardson J, Rychlicka-Buniowska E, et al. Mosaic loss of chromosome Y in
leukocytes matters. Nat Genet 2019; 51:4.
31. Loftfield E, Zhou W, Graubard BI, et al. Predictors of mosaic chromosome Y loss and
associations with mortality in the UK Biobank. Sci Rep 2018; 8:12316.
32. Romano AD, Paglia A, Bellanti F, et al. Molecular Aspects and Treatment of Iron Deficiency
in the Elderly. Int J Mol Sci 2020; 21.
33. Pinto A, De Filippi R, Frigeri F, et al. Aging and the hemopoietic system. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol 2003; 48:S3.
34. Fuentes E, Palomo I. Role of oxidative stress on platelet hyperreactivity during aging. Life
Sci 2016; 148:17.
35. Franchini M. Hemostasis and aging. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2006; 60:144.
36. Isaia G, Greppi F, Ausiello L, et al. D-dimer plasma concentrations in an older hospitalized
population. J Am Geriatr Soc 2011; 59:2385.
37. Mehta J, Mehta P, Lawson D, Saldeen T. Plasma tissue plasminogen activator inhibitor
levels in coronary artery disease: correlation with age and serum triglyceride
concentrations. J Am Coll Cardiol 1987; 9:263.
38. Yamamoto K, Takeshita K, Kojima T, et al. Aging and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1) regulation: implication in the pathogenesis of thrombotic disorders in the elderly.
Cardiovasc Res 2005; 66:276.
39. Yamamoto K, Takeshita K, Shimokawa T, et al. Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 is a
major stress-regulated gene: implications for stress-induced thrombosis in aged
individuals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002; 99:890.
40. Hall KE, Proctor DD, Fisher L, Rose S. American gastroenterological association future
trends committee report: effects of aging of the population on gastroenterology practice,
education, and research. Gastroenterology 2005; 129:1305.
41. Dunn-Walters DK, Howard WA, Bible JM. The Aeging Gut. Mech Ageing Dev 2004; 125:851.
42. Smith CH, Boland B, Daureeawoo Y, et al. Effect of aging on stimulated salivary flow in
adults. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013; 61:805.
43. Leehan KM, Pezant NP, Rasmussen A, et al. Fatty infiltration of the minor salivary glands
is a selective feature of aging but not Sjögren's syndrome. Autoimmunity 2017; 50:451.

-- 38 of 66 --

44. Leehan KM, Pezant NP, Rasmussen A, et al. Minor salivary gland fibrosis in Sjögren's
syndrome is elevated, associated with focus score and not solely a consequence of aging.
Clin Exp Rheumatol 2018; 36 Suppl 112:80.
45. Rogus-Pulia NM, Gangnon R, Kind A, et al. A Pilot Study of Perceived Mouth Dryness,
Perceived Swallowing Effort, and Saliva Substitute Effects in Healthy Adults Across the
Age Range. Dysphagia 2018; 33:200.
46. Nagler RM, Hershkovich O. Age-related changes in unstimulated salivary function and
composition and its relations to medications and oral sensorial complaints. Aging Clin
Exp Res 2005; 17:358.
47. Fulp SR, Dalton CB, Castell JA, Castell DO. Aging-related alterations in human upper
esophageal sphincter function. Am J Gastroenterol 1990; 85:1569.
48. Frederick MG, Ott DJ, Grishaw EK, et al. Functional abnormalities of the pharynx: a
prospective analysis of radiographic abnormalities relative to age and symptoms. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 1996; 166:353.
49. Iyota K, Mizutani S, Oku S, et al. A Cross-Sectional Study of Age-Related Changes in Oral
Function in Healthy Japanese Individuals. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020; 17.
50. Dua KS, Surapaneni SN, Kuribayashi S, et al. Effect of aging on hypopharyngeal safe
volume and the aerodigestive reflexes protecting the airways. Laryngoscope 2014;
124:1862.
51. Vicini C, De Vito A, Iannella G, et al. The aging effect on upper airways collapse of patients
with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2018; 275:2983.
52. Cock C, Besanko L, Kritas S, et al. Impaired bolus clearance in asymptomatic older adults
during high-resolution impedance manometry. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2016; 28:1890.
53. Mei L, Dua A, Kern M, et al. Older Age Reduces Upper Esophageal Sphincter and
Esophageal Body Responses to Simulated Slow and Ultraslow Reflux Events and Post-
Reflux Residue. Gastroenterology 2018; 155:760.
54. Lasch H, Castell DO, Castell JA. Evidence for diminished visceral pain with aging: studies
using graded intraesophageal balloon distension. Am J Physiol 1997; 272:G1.
55. Kekki M, Samloff IM, Ihamäki T, et al. Age- and sex-related behaviour of gastric acid
secretion at the population level. Scand J Gastroenterol 1982; 17:737.
56. Feldman M, Cryer B, McArthur KE, et al. Effects of aging and gastritis on gastric acid and
pepsin secretion in humans: a prospective study. Gastroenterology 1996; 110:1043.
57. Hurwitz A, Brady DA, Schaal SE, et al. Gastric acidity in older adults. JAMA 1997; 278:659.
58. Haruma K, Kamada T, Kawaguchi H, et al. Effect of age and Helicobacter pylori infection
on gastric acid secretion. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2000; 15:277.
59. Marshall BJ. Helicobacter pylori. Am J Gastroenterol 1994; 89:S116.

-- 39 of 66 --

60. Guslandi M, Pellegrini A, Sorghi M. Gastric mucosal defences in the elderly. Gerontology
1999; 45:206.
61. Tarnawski AS, Ahluwalia A, Jones MK. Increased susceptibility of aging gastric mucosa to
injury: the mechanisms and clinical implications. World J Gastroenterol 2014; 20:4467.
62. Gomez-Pinilla PJ, Gibbons SJ, Sarr MG, et al. Changes in interstitial cells of cajal with age
in the human stomach and colon. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2011; 23:36.
63. Yin Y, Zhang W. The Role of Ghrelin in Senescence: A Mini-Review. Gerontology 2016;
62:155.
64. Goldschmiedt M, Barnett CC, Schwarz BE, et al. Effect of age on gastric acid secretion and
serum gastrin concentrations in healthy men and women. Gastroenterology 1991;
101:977.
65. Saltzman JR, Russell RM. The aging gut. Nutritional issues. Gastroenterol Clin North Am
1998; 27:309.
66. Salles N. Basic mechanisms of the aging gastrointestinal tract. Dig Dis 2007; 25:112.
67. Drozdowski L, Thomson AB. Aging and the intestine. World J Gastroenterol 2006; 12:7578.
68. Parlesak A, Klein B, Schecher K, et al. Prevalence of small bowel bacterial overgrowth and
its association with nutrition intake in nonhospitalized older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc
2003; 51:768.
69. Man AL, Bertelli E, Rentini S, et al. Age-associated modifications of intestinal permeability
and innate immunity in human small intestine. Clin Sci (Lond) 2015; 129:515.
70. Hilton D, Iman N, Burke GJ, et al. Absence of abdominal pain in older persons with
endoscopic ulcers: a prospective study. Am J Gastroenterol 2001; 96:380.
71. Cowen T, Johnson RJ, Soubeyre V, Santer RM. Restricted diet rescues rat enteric motor
neurones from age related cell death. Gut 2000; 47:653.
72. Fischer M, Fadda HM. The Effect of Sex and Age on Small Intestinal Transit Times in
Humans. J Pharm Sci 2016; 105:682.
73. Li H, Kucharavy HC, Hajj C, et al. Radiation-induced gastrointestinal (GI) syndrome as a
function of age. Cell Death Discov 2023; 9:31.
74. Edwina AE, Koziolek M, Steenackers N, et al. Tracking the journey: Gastrointestinal transit
and intraluminal pH dynamics in aging populations using wireless motility capsule. Int J
Pharm 2025; 669:125016.
75. Wade PR, Hornby PJ. Age-related neurodegenerative changes and how they affect the
gut. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ 2005; 2005:pe8.
76. Lagier E, Delvaux M, Vellas B, et al. Influence of age on rectal tone and sensitivity to
distension in healthy subjects. Neurogastroenterol Motil 1999; 11:101.

-- 40 of 66 --

77. Lyon C, Clark DC. Diagnosis of acute abdominal pain in older patients. Am Fam Physician
2006; 74:1537.
78. Gundling F, Seidl H, Scalercio N, et al. Influence of gender and age on anorectal function:
normal values from anorectal manometry in a large caucasian population. Digestion
2010; 81:207.
79. Bitar KN, Patil SB. Aging and gastrointestinal smooth muscle. Mech Ageing Dev 2004;
125:907.
80. Lewicky-Gaupp C, Hamilton Q, Ashton-Miller J, et al. Anal sphincter structure and function
relationships in aging and fecal incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2009; 200:559.e1.
81. Comparato G, Pilotto A, Franzè A, et al. Diverticular disease in the elderly. Dig Dis 2007;
25:151.
82. Commane DM, Arasaradnam RP, Mills S, et al. Diet, ageing and genetic factors in the
pathogenesis of diverticular disease. World J Gastroenterol 2009; 15:2479.
83. Xiao ZQ, Moragoda L, Jaszewski R, et al. Aging is associated with increased proliferation
and decreased apoptosis in the colonic mucosa. Mech Ageing Dev 2001; 122:1849.
84. Tran L, Greenwood-Van Meerveld B. Age-associated remodeling of the intestinal
epithelial barrier. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2013; 68:1045.
85. Salazar AM, Aparicio R, Clark RI, et al. Intestinal barrier dysfunction: an evolutionarily
conserved hallmark of aging. Dis Model Mech 2023; 16.
86. Conway J, De Jong EN, White AJ, et al. Age-related loss of intestinal barrier integrity plays
an integral role in thymic involution and T cell ageing. Aging Cell 2025; 24:e14401.
87. Wilms E, Troost FJ, Elizalde M, et al. Intestinal barrier function is maintained with aging - a
comprehensive study in healthy subjects and irritable bowel syndrome patients. Sci Rep
2020; 10:475.
88. Kim S, Jazwinski SM. The Gut Microbiota and Healthy Aging: A Mini-Review. Gerontology
2018; 64:513.
89. Ragonnaud E, Biragyn A. Gut microbiota as the key controllers of "healthy" aging of
elderly people. Immun Ageing 2021; 18:2.
90. Mabbott NA, Kobayashi A, Sehgal A, et al. Aging and the mucosal immune system in the
intestine. Biogerontology 2015; 16:133.
91. McLean AJ, Le Couteur DG. Aging biology and geriatric clinical pharmacology. Pharmacol
Rev 2004; 56:163.
92. Schmucker DL. Aging and the liver: an update. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998;
53:B315.
93. Wachsmuth M, Hübner A, Li M, et al. Age-Related and Heteroplasmy-Related Variation in
Human mtDNA Copy Number. PLoS Genet 2016; 12:e1005939.

-- 41 of 66 --

94. de Boer JD, Koopman JJ, Metselaar HJ, et al. Liver transplantation with geriatric liver
allografts: the current situation in Eurotransplant. Transpl Int 2017; 30:432.
95. Jiménez-Romero C, Cambra F, Caso O, et al. Octogenarian liver grafts: Is their use for
transplant currently justified? World J Gastroenterol 2017; 23:3099.
96. Rahmioglu N, Andrew T, Cherkas L, et al. Epidemiology and genetic epidemiology of the
liver function test proteins. PLoS One 2009; 4:e4435.
97. Anantharaju A, Feller A, Chedid A. Aging Liver. A review. Gerontology 2002; 48:343.
98. Fu A, Nair KS. Age effect on fibrinogen and albumin synthesis in humans. Am J Physiol
1998; 275:E1023.
99. Tietz NW, Shuey DF, Wekstein DR. Laboratory values in fit aging individuals--
sexagenarians through centenarians. Clin Chem 1992; 38:1167.
100. Rudman D, Feller AG, Nagraj HS, et al. Relation of serum albumin concentration to death
rate in nursing home men. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1987; 11:360.
101. Schmucker DL. Age-related changes in liver structure and function: Implications for
disease ? Exp Gerontol 2005; 40:650.
102. Sotaniemi EA, Arranto AJ, Pelkonen O, Pasanen M. Age and cytochrome P450-linked drug
metabolism in humans: an analysis of 226 subjects with equal histopathologic conditions.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 1997; 61:331.
103. Turnheim K. When drug therapy gets old: pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in
the elderly. Exp Gerontol 2003; 38:843.
104. Froom P, Miron E, Barak M. Oral anticoagulants in the elderly. Br J Haematol 2003;
120:526.
105. Valdivieso V, Palma R, Wünkhaus R, et al. Effect of aging on biliary lipid composition and
bile acid metabolism in normal Chilean women. Gastroenterology 1978; 74:871.
106. Watanabe Y, Kuboki S, Shimizu H, et al. A New Proposal of Criteria for the Future
Remnant Liver Volume in Older Patients Undergoing Major Hepatectomy for Biliary Tract
Cancer. Ann Surg 2018; 267:338.
107. Yang W, Xie Y, Song B, et al. Effects of aging and menopause on pancreatic fat fraction in
healthy women population: A strobe-compliant article. Medicine (Baltimore) 2019;
98:e14451.
108. Löhr JM, Panic N, Vujasinovic M, Verbeke CS. The ageing pancreas: a systematic review of
the evidence and analysis of the consequences. J Intern Med 2018; 283:446.
109. Bülow R, Simon P, Thiel R, et al. Anatomic variants of the pancreatic duct and their clinical
relevance: an MR-guided study in the general population. Eur Radiol 2014; 24:3142.
110. Chkhotua AB, Gabusi E, Altimari A, et al. Increased expression of p16(INK4a) and
p27(Kip1) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor genes in aging human kidney and chronic

-- 42 of 66 --

allograft nephropathy. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 41:1303.
111. Sturmlechner I, Durik M, Sieben CJ, et al. Cellular senescence in renal ageing and disease.
Nat Rev Nephrol 2017; 13:77.
112. Wang WJ, Chen XM, Cai GY. Cellular senescence and the senescence-associated secretory
phenotype: Potential therapeutic targets for renal fibrosis. Exp Gerontol 2021;
151:111403.
113. Denic A, Lieske JC, Chakkera HA, et al. The Substantial Loss of Nephrons in Healthy
Human Kidneys with Aging. J Am Soc Nephrol 2017; 28:313.
114. Nyengaard JR, Bendtsen TF. Glomerular number and size in relation to age, kidney
weight, and body surface in normal man. Anat Rec 1992; 232:194.
115. Denic A, Mathew J, Lerman LO, et al. Single-Nephron Glomerular Filtration Rate in Healthy
Adults. N Engl J Med 2017; 376:2349.
116. Tracy RE, Velez-Duran M, Heigle T, Oalmann MC. Two variants of nephrosclerosis
separately related to age and blood pressure. Am J Pathol 1988; 131:270.
117. Long DA, Mu W, Price KL, Johnson RJ. Blood vessels and the aging kidney. Nephron Exp
Nephrol 2005; 101:e95.
118. Rule AD, Amer H, Cornell LD, et al. The association between age and nephrosclerosis on
renal biopsy among healthy adults. Ann Intern Med 2010; 152:561.
119. Nkuipou-Kenfack E, Bhat A, Klein J, et al. Identification of ageing-associated naturally
occurring peptides in human urine. Oncotarget 2015; 6:34106.
120. Fuiano G, Sund S, Mazza G, et al. Renal hemodynamic response to maximal vasodilating
stimulus in healthy older subjects. Kidney Int 2001; 59:1052.
121. Esposito C, Plati A, Mazzullo T, et al. Renal function and functional reserve in healthy
elderly individuals. J Nephrol 2007; 20:617.
122. Ungar A, Cristofari C, Torrini M, et al. Changes in renal autacoids in aged human
hypertensives. J Physiol Pharmacol 2000; 51:619.
123. Field TS, Gurwitz JH, Glynn RJ, et al. The renal effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs in older people: findings from the Established Populations for Epidemiologic
Studies of the Elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc 1999; 47:507.
124. Whelton A. Nephrotoxicity of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: physiologic
foundations and clinical implications. Am J Med 1999; 106:13S.
125. Lindeman RD. Overview: renal physiology and pathophysiology of aging. Am J Kidney Dis
1990; 16:275.
126. Giannelli SV, Patel KV, Windham BG, et al. Magnitude of underascertainment of impaired
kidney function in older adults with normal serum creatinine. J Am Geriatr Soc 2007;
55:816.

-- 43 of 66 --

127. Schmitt R, Melk A. Molecular mechanisms of renal aging. Kidney Int 2017; 92:569.
128. Fliser D. Assessment of renal function in elderly patients. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
2008; 17:604.
129. Lopes MB, Araújo LQ, Passos MT, et al. Estimation of glomerular filtration rate from
serum creatinine and cystatin C in octogenarians and nonagenarians. BMC Nephrol 2013;
14:265.
130. Christensson A, Elmståhl S. Estimation of the age-dependent decline of glomerular
filtration rate from formulas based on creatinine and cystatin C in the general elderly
population. Nephron Clin Pract 2011; 117:c40.
131. Odden MC, Tager IB, Gansevoort RT, et al. Age and cystatin C in healthy adults: a
collaborative study. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010; 25:463.
132. Newman AB, Sanders JL, Kizer JR, et al. Trajectories of function and biomarkers with age:
the CHS All Stars Study. Int J Epidemiol 2016; 45:1135.
133. Parsons TJ, Sartini C, Ash S, et al. Objectively measured physical activity and kidney
function in older men; a cross-sectional population-based study. Age Ageing 2017;
46:1010.
134. Sands JM. Urine concentrating and diluting ability during aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med
Sci 2012; 67:1352.
135. Pucelikova T, Dangas G, Mehran R. Contrast-induced nephropathy. Catheter Cardiovasc
Interv 2008; 71:62.
136. Toprak O. Risk markers for contrast-induced nephropathy. Am J Med Sci 2007; 334:283.
137. Schmitt R, Cantley LG. The impact of aging on kidney repair. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
2008; 294:F1265.
138. Ishida M, Bulos B, Takamoto S, Sacktor B. Hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 by renal
mitochondria from rats of different ages. Endocrinology 1987; 121:443.
139. Tsai KS, Heath H 3rd, Kumar R, Riggs BL. Impaired vitamin D metabolism with aging in
women. Possible role in pathogenesis of senile osteoporosis. J Clin Invest 1984; 73:1668.
140. Kinyamu HK, Gallagher JC, Petranick KM, Ryschon KL. Effect of parathyroid hormone
(hPTH[1-34]) infusion on serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and parathyroid hormone in
normal women. J Bone Miner Res 1996; 11:1400.
141. Noth RH, Lassman MN, Tan SY, et al. Age and the renin-aldosterone system. Arch Intern
Med 1977; 137:1414.
142. Weidmann P, De Myttenaere-Bursztein S, Maxwell MH, de Lima J. Effect on aging on
plasma renin and aldosterone in normal man. Kidney Int 1975; 8:325.
143. Diz DI. Lewis K. Dahl memorial lecture: the renin-angiotensin system and aging.
Hypertension 2008; 52:37.

-- 44 of 66 --

144. Nanba K, Vaidya A, Williams GH, et al. Age-Related Autonomous Aldosteronism.
Circulation 2017; 136:347.
145. Powers JS, Krantz SB, Collins JC, et al. Erythropoietin response to anemia as a function of
age. J Am Geriatr Soc 1991; 39:30.
146. Ferrucci L, Guralnik JM, Bandinelli S, et al. Unexplained anaemia in older persons is
characterised by low erythropoietin and low levels of pro-inflammatory markers. Br J
Haematol 2007; 136:849.
147. Drew DA, Katz R, Kritchevsky S, et al. Association between Soluble Klotho and Change in
Kidney Function: The Health Aging and Body Composition Study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2017;
28:1859.
148. Arking DE, Krebsova A, Macek M Sr, et al. Association of human aging with a functional
variant of klotho. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002; 99:856.
149. White N. The relationship of the degree of coronary atherosclerosis with age in men.
Circulation 1950; 1:645.
150. Fleg JL, O'Connor F, Gerstenblith G, et al. Impact of age on the cardiovascular response to
dynamic upright exercise in healthy men and women. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1995; 78:890.
151. Taffet GE, Lakatta EG. Aging of the Cardiovascular System. In: Principles of Geriatric Medi
cine and Gerontology, 5th ed, Hazzard WR, Blass JP, Halter JB, et al (Eds), McGraw-Hill, Ne
w York 2003. p.403.
152. Wehrum T, Lodemann T, Hagenlocher P, et al. Age-related changes of right atrial
morphology and inflow pattern assessed using 4D flow cardiovascular magnetic
resonance: results of a population-based study. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2018; 20:38.
153. Van de Veire NR, De Backer J, Ascoop AK, et al. Echocardiographically estimated left
ventricular end-diastolic and right ventricular systolic pressure in normotensive healthy
individuals. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 2006; 22:633.
154. Yoshida Y, Nakanishi K, Daimon M, et al. Alteration of Cardiac Performance and Serum B-
Type Natriuretic Peptide Level in Healthy Aging. J Am Coll Cardiol 2019; 74:1789.
155. Singh A, Carvalho Singulane C, Miyoshi T, et al. Normal Values of Left Atrial Size and
Function and the Impact of Age: Results of the World Alliance Societies of
Echocardiography Study. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2022; 35:154.
156. Goette A, Kalman JM, Aguinaga L, et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS/SOLAECE expert consensus on
atrial cardiomyopathies: Definition, characterization, and clinical implication. Heart
Rhythm 2017; 14:e3.
157. Gates PE, Tanaka H, Graves J, Seals DR. Left ventricular structure and diastolic function
with human ageing. Relation to habitual exercise and arterial stiffness. Eur Heart J 2003;
24:2213.

-- 45 of 66 --

158. Hagström L, Henein MY, Karp K, et al. Impact of age and sex on normal left heart
structure and function. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2017; 37:759.
159. Pandey A, Kraus WE, Brubaker PH, Kitzman DW. Healthy Aging and
Cardiovascular Function: Invasive Hemodynamics During Rest and Exercise in
104 Healthy Volunteers. JACC Heart Fail 2020; 8:111.
160. Kitzman DW, Scholz DG, Hagen PT, et al. Age-related changes in normal human hearts
during the first 10 decades of life. Part II (Maturity): A quantitative anatomic study of 765
specimens from subjects 20 to 99 years old. Mayo Clin Proc 1988; 63:137.
161. Bergmann O, Bhardwaj RD, Bernard S, et al. Evidence for cardiomyocyte renewal in
humans. Science 2009; 324:98.
162. Olivetti G, Melissari M, Capasso JM, Anversa P. Cardiomyopathy of the aging human
heart. Myocyte loss and reactive cellular hypertrophy. Circ Res 1991; 68:1560.
163. Zhang XP, Vatner SF, Shen YT, et al. Increased apoptosis and myocyte enlargement with
decreased cardiac mass; distinctive features of the aging male, but not female, monkey
heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2007; 43:487.
164. Kajstura J, Cheng W, Sarangarajan R, et al. Necrotic and apoptotic myocyte cell death in
the aging heart of Fischer 344 rats. Am J Physiol 1996; 271:H1215.
165. Jones SA, Boyett MR, Lancaster MK. Declining into failure: the age-dependent loss of the
L-type calcium channel within the sinoatrial node. Circulation 2007; 115:1183.
166. Stratton JR, Cerqueira MD, Schwartz RS, et al. Differences in cardiovascular responses to
isoproterenol in relation to age and exercise training in healthy men. Circulation 1992;
86:504.
167. Nathania M, Hollingsworth KG, Bates M, et al. Impact of age on the association between
cardiac high-energy phosphate metabolism and cardiac power in women. Heart 2018;
104:111.
168. Piotrowska Ż, Niezgoda M, Łebkowski W, et al. Sex differences in distribution of
cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2), S100A6 and CacyBP/SIP in human ageing hearts.
Biol Sex Differ 2018; 9:50.
169. Pacher P, Steffens S, Haskó G, et al. Cardiovascular effects of marijuana and synthetic
cannabinoids: the good, the bad, and the ugly. Nat Rev Cardiol 2018; 15:151.
170. Ozemek C, Whaley MH, Finch WH, Kaminsky LA. High Cardiorespiratory Fitness Levels
Slow the Decline in Peak Heart Rate with Age. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2016; 48:73.
171. Parati G, Di Rienzo M. Determinants of heart rate and heart rate variability. J Hypertens
2003; 21:477.
172. Fleg JL, Kennedy HL. Long-term prognostic significance of ambulatory
electrocardiographic findings in apparently healthy subjects greater than or equal to 60
years of age. Am J Cardiol 1992; 70:748.

-- 46 of 66 --

173. Busby MJ, Shefrin EA, Fleg JL. Prevalence and long-term significance of exercise-induced
frequent or repetitive ventricular ectopic beats in apparently healthy volunteers. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1989; 14:1659.
174. Stratton JR, Levy WC, Cerqueira MD, et al. Cardiovascular responses to exercise. Effects of
aging and exercise training in healthy men. Circulation 1994; 89:1648.
175. Swinne CJ, Shapiro EP, Lima SD, Fleg JL. Age-associated changes in left ventricular
diastolic performance during isometric exercise in normal subjects. Am J Cardiol 1992;
69:823.
176. Cain BS, Meldrum DR, Joo KS, et al. Human SERCA2a levels correlate inversely with age in
senescent human myocardium. J Am Coll Cardiol 1998; 32:458.
177. Hollingsworth KG, Blamire AM, Keavney BD, Macgowan GA. Left ventricular torsion,
energetics, and diastolic function in normal human aging. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
2012; 302:H885.
178. Liu CY, Liu YC, Wu C, et al. Evaluation of age-related interstitial myocardial fibrosis with
cardiac magnetic resonance contrast-enhanced T1 mapping: MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of
Atherosclerosis). J Am Coll Cardiol 2013; 62:1280.
179. Gazoti Debessa CR, Mesiano Maifrino LB, Rodrigues de Souza R. Age related changes of
the collagen network of the human heart. Mech Ageing Dev 2001; 122:1049.
180. Hamada M, Shigematsu Y, Takezaki M, et al. Plasma levels of atrial and brain natriuretic
peptides in apparently healthy subjects: Effects of sex, age, and hemoglobin
concentration. Int J Cardiol 2017; 228:599.
181. Wolsk E, Bakkestrøm R, Thomsen JH, et al. The Influence of Age on Hemodynamic
Parameters During Rest and Exercise in Healthy Individuals. JACC Heart Fail 2017; 5:337.
182. Swain SM, Whaley FS, Ewer MS. Congestive heart failure in patients treated with
doxorubicin: a retrospective analysis of three trials. Cancer 2003; 97:2869.
183. Mao SS, Ahmadi N, Shah B, et al. Normal thoracic aorta diameter on cardiac computed
tomography in healthy asymptomatic adults: impact of age and gender. Acad Radiol
2008; 15:827.
184. Adriaans BP, Heuts S, Gerretsen S, et al. Aortic elongation part I: the normal aortic ageing
process. Heart 2018; 104:1772.
185. Loose S, Solou D, Strecker C, et al. Characterization of aortic aging using 3D multi-
parametric MRI-long-term follow-up in a population study. Sci Rep 2023; 13:6285.
186. Avolio AP, Kuznetsova T, Heyndrickx GR, et al. Arterial Flow, Pulse Pressure and Pulse
Wave Velocity in Men and Women at Various Ages. Adv Exp Med Biol 2018; 1065:153.
187. Ashley J, Pasha EP, Tarumi T, et al. Lower diastolic velocity in the internal carotid artery
mediates lower cerebral blood flow with age. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2025; 138:1385.

-- 47 of 66 --

188. Baldo MP, Cunha RS, Molina MDCB, et al. Carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity in a healthy
adult sample: The ELSA-Brasil study. Int J Cardiol 2018; 251:90.
189. Oue A, Asashima C, Oizumi R, et al. Age-related attenuation of conduit artery blood flow
response to passive heating differs between the arm and leg. Eur J Appl Physiol 2018;
118:2307.
190. Gillooly M, Lamb D. Airspace size in lungs of lifelong non-smokers: effect of age and sex.
Thorax 1993; 48:39.
191. Janssens JP. Aging of the respiratory system: impact on pulmonary function tests and
adaptation to exertion. Clin Chest Med 2005; 26:469.
192. Cho SJ, Stout-Delgado HW. Aging and Lung Disease. Annu Rev Physiol 2020; 82:433.
193. Taylor BJ, Johnson BD. The pulmonary circulation and exercise responses in the elderly.
Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2010; 31:528.
194. Tagaram HR, Wang G, Umstead TM, et al. Characterization of a human surfactant protein
A1 (SP-A1) gene-specific antibody; SP-A1 content variation among individuals of varying
age and pulmonary health. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2007; 292:L1052.
195. Moliva JI, Rajaram MV, Sidiki S, et al. Molecular composition of the alveolar lining fluid in
the aging lung. Age (Dordr) 2014; 36:933.
196. Santesmasses D, Castro JP, Zenin AA, et al. COVID-19 is an emergent disease of aging.
Aging Cell 2020; 19:e13230.
197. Calhoun C, Shivshankar P, Saker M, et al. Senescent Cells Contribute to the Physiological
Remodeling of Aged Lungs. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2016; 71:153.
198. Stam H, Hrachovina V, Stijnen T, Versprille A. Diffusing capacity dependent on lung
volume and age in normal subjects. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1994; 76:2356.
199. Update on Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Maryland. Md Med J 1993; 42:487.
200. Hardie JA, Mørkve O, Ellingsen I. Effect of body position on arterial oxygen tension in the
elderly. Respiration 2002; 69:123.
201. Crapo RO, Jensen RL, Hegewald M, Tashkin DP. Arterial blood gas reference values for sea
level and an altitude of 1,400 meters. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999; 160:1525.
202. Cerveri I, Zoia MC, Fanfulla F, et al. Reference values of arterial oxygen tension in the
middle-aged and elderly. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 152:934.
203. Hardie JA, Vollmer WM, Buist AS, et al. Reference values for arterial blood gases in the
elderly. Chest 2004; 125:2053.
204. Estenne M, Yernault JC, De Troyer A. Rib cage and diaphragm-abdomen compliance in
humans: effects of age and posture. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1985; 59:1842.
205. Polkey MI, Harris ML, Hughes PD, et al. The contractile properties of the elderly human
diaphragm. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997; 155:1560.

-- 48 of 66 --

206. Aghasafari P, Heise RL, Reynolds A, Pidaparti RM. Aging Effects on Alveolar Sacs Under
Mechanical Ventilation. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2019; 74:139.
207. Kuster SP, Kuster D, Schindler C, et al. Reference equations for lung function screening of
healthy never-smoking adults aged 18-80 years. Eur Respir J 2008; 31:860.
208. Xu X, Laird N, Dockery DW, et al. Age, period, and cohort effects on pulmonary function in
a 24-year longitudinal study. Am J Epidemiol 1995; 141:554.
209. Petraglia L, Komici K, Bencivenga L, et al. The association between muscle strength and z
scores of pulmonary function. Sci Rep 2025; 15:27662.
210. Triebner K, Matulonga B, Johannessen A, et al. Menopause Is Associated with Accelerated
Lung Function Decline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017; 195:1058.
211. Triebner K, Accordini S, Calciano L, et al. Exogenous female sex steroids may reduce lung
ageing after menopause: A 20-year follow-up study of a general population sample
(ECRHS). Maturitas 2019; 120:29.
212. Sato Y, Onoue A, Machida K, et al. Seventeen-year cumulative incidence of airflow
limitation and lung function decline in two independent cohorts: The Japanese Red Cross
Kumamoto study. Respir Investig 2025; 63:844.
213. Taffet GE, Donohue JF, Altman PR. Considerations for managing chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease in the elderly. Clin Interv Aging 2014; 9:23.
214. Karrasch S, Behr J, Huber RM, et al. Heterogeneous pattern of differences in respiratory
parameters between elderly with either good or poor FEV1. BMC Pulm Med 2018; 18:27.
215. Enright PL, Kronmal RA, Manolio TA, et al. Respiratory muscle strength in the elderly.
Correlates and reference values. Cardiovascular Health Study Research Group. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1994; 149:430.
216. Enright PL, Adams AB, Boyle PJ, Sherrill DL. Spirometry and maximal respiratory pressure
references from healthy Minnesota 65- to 85-year-old women and men. Chest 1995;
108:663.
217. Summerhill EM, Angov N, Garber C, McCool FD. Respiratory muscle strength in the
physically active elderly. Lung 2007; 185:315.
218. Skloot GS. The Effects of Aging on Lung Structure and Function. Clin Geriatr Med 2017;
33:447.
219. Kronenberg RS, Drage CW. Attenuation of the ventilatory and heart rate responses to
hypoxia and hypercapnia with aging in normal men. J Clin Invest 1973; 52:1812.
220. Pack AI, Millman RP. Changes in control of ventilation, awake and asleep, in the elderly. J
Am Geriatr Soc 1986; 34:533.
221. Han S, Budinger GRS, Gottardi CJ. Alveolar epithelial regeneration in the aging lung. J Clin
Invest 2023; 133.

-- 49 of 66 --

222. Ho JC, Chan KN, Hu WH, et al. The effect of aging on nasal mucociliary clearance, beat
frequency, and ultrastructure of respiratory cilia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;
163:983.
223. Svartengren M, Falk R, Philipson K. Long-term clearance from small airways decreases
with age. Eur Respir J 2005; 26:609.
224. Lee SY, Mac Aogáin M, Fam KD, et al. Airway microbiome composition correlates with
lung function and arterial stiffness in an age-dependent manner. PLoS One 2019;
14:e0225636.
225. Torrelles JB, Restrepo BI, Bai Y, et al. The Impact of Aging on the Lung Alveolar
Environment, Predetermining Susceptibility to Respiratory Infections. Front Aging 2022;
3:818700.
226. Fleg JL, Morrell CH, Bos AG, et al. Accelerated longitudinal decline of aerobic capacity in
healthy older adults. Circulation 2005; 112:674.
227. Hollenberg M, Yang J, Haight TJ, Tager IB. Longitudinal changes in aerobic capacity:
implications for concepts of aging. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2006; 61:851.
228. Hu TW, Wagner TH, Bentkover JD, et al. Costs of urinary incontinence and overactive
bladder in the United States: a comparative study. Urology 2004; 63:461.
229. Losco G, Chan L, Esler R, et al. Natural history of lower urinary tract symptoms and
voiding parameters in ageing men with 5-year follow-up-the concord health and ageing
in men project (CHAMP). Age Ageing 2025; 54.
230. Elbadawi A, Diokno AC, Millard RJ. The aging bladder: morphology and urodynamics.
World J Urol 1998; 16 Suppl 1:S10.
231. Rosier PFWM, Ten Donkelaar CS, de Kort LMO. Clinical Epidemiology: Detrusor Voiding
Contraction Maximum Power, Related to Ageing. Urology 2019; 124:72.
232. Gilpin SA, Gilpin CJ, Dixon JS, et al. The effect of age on the autonomic innervation of the
urinary bladder. Br J Urol 1986; 58:378.
233. Tadic SD, Griffiths D, Schaefer W, et al. Brain activity underlying impaired continence
control in older women with overactive bladder. Neurourol Urodyn 2012; 31:652.
234. Haddad R, Panicker JN, Verbakel I, et al. The low dopamine hypothesis: A plausible
mechanism underpinning residual urine, overactive bladder and nocturia (RON)
syndrome in older patients. Prog Urol 2023; 33:155.
235. Petereit C, Porath K, Rackow S, et al. Age-dependent effects of the β3 adrenoceptor
agonist CL316,243 on human and rat detrusor muscle strips. Pflugers Arch 2024;
476:243.
236. Dubeau CE. The aging lower urinary tract. J Urol 2006; 175:S11.
237. Capobianco G, Donolo E, Borghero G, et al. Effects of intravaginal estriol and pelvic floor
rehabilitation on urogenital aging in postmenopausal women. Arch Gynecol Obstet 2012;

-- 50 of 66 --

285:397.
238. Curtiss N, Balachandran A, Krska L, et al. Age, menopausal status and the bladder
microbiome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2018; 228:126.
239. Rosen R, Altwein J, Boyle P, et al. Lower urinary tract symptoms and male sexual
dysfunction: the multinational survey of the aging male (MSAM-7). Eur Urol 2003; 44:637.
240. Lindau ST, Gavrilova N. Sex, health, and years of sexually active life gained due to good
health: evidence from two US population based cross sectional surveys of ageing. BMJ
2010; 340:c810.
241. Seftel AD. From aspiration to achievement: assessment and noninvasive treatment of
erectile dysfunction in aging men. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005; 53:119.
242. Harris ID, Fronczak C, Roth L, Meacham RB. Fertility and the aging male. Rev Urol 2011;
13:e184.
243. Hermann M, Untergasser G, Rumpold H, Berger P. Aging of the male reproductive
system. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35:1267.
244. Tarlatzis BC, Zepiridis L. Perimenopausal conception. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2003; 997:93.
245. Kingsberg SA. The impact of aging on sexual function in women and their partners. Arch
Sex Behav 2002; 31:431.
246. Dang HT, Noel-Romas L, Knodel S, et al. Aging Is Associated With Decreased Lactobacillus
and Increased Cervicovaginal Inflammation in Canadian Women. Am J Reprod Immunol
2025; 93:e70058.
247. Baumgartner RN, Waters DL, Gallagher D, et al. Predictors of skeletal muscle mass in
elderly men and women. Mech Ageing Dev 1999; 107:123.
248. Pasco JA, Mohebbi M, Holloway KL, et al. Musculoskeletal decline and mortality:
prospective data from the Geelong Osteoporosis Study. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle
2016.
249. Baumgartner RN, Koehler KM, Gallagher D, et al. Epidemiology of sarcopenia among the
elderly in New Mexico. Am J Epidemiol 1998; 147:755.
250. Ryall JG, Schertzer JD, Lynch GS. Cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying age-
related skeletal muscle wasting and weakness. Biogerontology 2008; 9:213.
251. Reinders I, Murphy RA, Brouwer IA, et al. Muscle Quality and Myosteatosis: Novel
Associations With Mortality Risk: The Age, Gene/Environment Susceptibility (AGES)-
Reykjavik Study. Am J Epidemiol 2016; 183:53.
252. Reinders I, Murphy RA, Koster A, et al. Muscle Quality and Muscle Fat Infiltration in
Relation to Incident Mobility Disability and Gait Speed Decline: the Age,
Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2015;
70:1030.

-- 51 of 66 --

253. Cesari M, Pahor M, Lauretani F, et al. Skeletal muscle and mortality results from the
InCHIANTI Study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2009; 64:377.
254. Goodpaster BH, He J, Watkins S, Kelley DE. Skeletal muscle lipid content and insulin
resistance: evidence for a paradox in endurance-trained athletes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2001; 86:5755.
255. Pruchnic R, Katsiaras A, He J, et al. Exercise training increases intramyocellular lipid and
oxidative capacity in older adults. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2004; 287:E857.
256. Tøien T, Nielsen JL, Berg OK, et al. The impact of life-long strength versus endurance
training on muscle fiber morphology and phenotype composition in older men. J Appl
Physiol (1985) 2023; 135:1360.
257. Faulkner JA, Larkin LM, Claflin DR, Brooks SV. Age-related changes in the structure and
function of skeletal muscles. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2007; 34:1091.
258. Watanabe K, Holobar A, Kouzaki M, et al. Age-related changes in motor unit firing pattern
of vastus lateralis muscle during low-moderate contraction. Age (Dordr) 2016; 38:48.
259. Delbono O. Neural control of aging skeletal muscle. Aging Cell 2003; 2:21.
260. Brooks SV, Faulkner JA. Contractile properties of skeletal muscles from young, adult and
aged mice. J Physiol 1988; 404:71.
261. Newman AB, Kupelian V, Visser M, et al. Strength, but not muscle mass, is associated with
mortality in the health, aging and body composition study cohort. J Gerontol A Biol Sci
Med Sci 2006; 61:72.
262. Degens H. Age-related skeletal muscle dysfunction: causes and mechanisms. J
Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2007; 7:246.
263. Snijders T, Verdijk LB, Smeets JS, et al. The skeletal muscle satellite cell response to a
single bout of resistance-type exercise is delayed with aging in men. Age (Dordr) 2014;
36:9699.
264. Bechshøft CJL, Jensen SM, Schjerling P, et al. Age and prior exercise in vivo determine the
subsequent in vitro molecular profile of myoblasts and nonmyogenic cells derived from
human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2019; 316:C898.
265. Balan E, De Groote E, Bouillon M, et al. No effect of the endurance training status on
senescence despite reduced inflammation in skeletal muscle of older individuals. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2020; 319:E447.
266. Carlson BM, Faulkner JA. Muscle transplantation between young and old rats: age of host
determines recovery. Am J Physiol 1989; 256:C1262.
267. Peng L, Gagliano-Jucá T, Pencina KM, et al. Age Trends in Growth and Differentiation
Factor-11 and Myostatin Levels in Healthy Men, and Differential Response to
Testosterone, Measured Using Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry. J
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2022; 77:763.

-- 52 of 66 --

268. Becker C, Lord SR, Studenski SA, et al. Myostatin antibody (LY2495655) in older weak
fallers: a proof-of-concept, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015;
3:948.
269. Johnson ML, Robinson MM, Nair KS. Skeletal muscle aging and the mitochondrion.
Trends Endocrinol Metab 2013; 24:247.
270. Grevendonk L, Connell NJ, McCrum C, et al. Impact of aging and exercise on skeletal
muscle mitochondrial capacity, energy metabolism, and physical function. Nat Commun
2021; 12:4773.
271. Musch TI, Eklund KE, Hageman KS, Poole DC. Altered regional blood flow responses to
submaximal exercise in older rats. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2004; 96:81.
272. Sinha M, Jang YC, Oh J, et al. Restoring systemic GDF11 levels reverses age-related
dysfunction in mouse skeletal muscle. Science 2014; 344:649.
273. Brun CE, Rudnicki MA. GDF11 and the Mythical Fountain of Youth. Cell Metab 2015; 22:54.
274. Yokota K, Chiba K, Okazaki N, et al. Deterioration of bone microstructure by aging and
menopause in Japanese healthy women: analysis by HR-pQCT. J Bone Miner Metab 2020;
38:826.
275. Ganguly P, El-Jawhari JJ, Giannoudis PV, et al. Age-related Changes in Bone Marrow
Mesenchymal Stromal Cells: A Potential Impact on Osteoporosis and Osteoarthritis
Development. Cell Transplant 2017; 26:1520.
276. Stolzing A, Jones E, McGonagle D, Scutt A. Age-related changes in human bone marrow-
derived mesenchymal stem cells: consequences for cell therapies. Mech Ageing Dev
2008; 129:163.
277. Kassem M, Marie PJ. Senescence-associated intrinsic mechanisms of osteoblast
dysfunctions. Aging Cell 2011; 10:191.
278. Chan GK, Duque G. Age-related bone loss: old bone, new facts. Gerontology 2002; 48:62.
279. Kirk B, Feehan J, Lombardi G, Duque G. Muscle, Bone, and Fat Crosstalk: the Biological
Role of Myokines, Osteokines, and Adipokines. Curr Osteoporos Rep 2020; 18:388.
280. Lee S, Kim JS, Park KS, et al. Daily Walking Accompanied with Intermittent Resistance
Exercise Prevents Osteosarcopenia: A Large Cohort Study. J Bone Metab 2022; 29:255.
281. Giangregorio L, Blimkie CJ. Skeletal adaptations to alterations in weight-bearing activity: a
comparison of models of disuse osteoporosis. Sports Med 2002; 32:459.
282. Schwab P, Klein RF. Nonpharmacological approaches to improve bone health and reduce
osteoporosis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2008; 20:213.
283. Yadav RN, Uniyal P, Sihota P, et al. Effect of ageing on microstructure and fracture
behavior of cortical bone as determined by experiment and Extended Finite Element
Method (XFEM). Med Eng Phys 2021; 93:100.

-- 53 of 66 --

284. Meyer RA Jr, Desai BR, Heiner DE, et al. Young, adult, and old rats have similar changes in
mRNA expression of many skeletal genes after fracture despite delayed healing with age.
J Orthop Res 2006; 24:1933.
285. Gruber R, Koch H, Doll BA, et al. Fracture healing in the elderly patient. Exp Gerontol
2006; 41:1080.
286. Boros K, Freemont T. Physiology of ageing of the musculoskeletal system. Best Pract Res
Clin Rheumatol 2017; 31:203.
287. Gray M, Boughton O, Wiles C, et al. Runaway resorption of microcracks contributes to
age-related hip-fracture patients. Sci Rep 2025; 15:28894.
288. Driscoll I, Davatzikos C, An Y, et al. Longitudinal pattern of regional brain volume change
differentiates normal aging from MCI. Neurology 2009; 72:1906.
289. Salat DH, Kaye JA, Janowsky JS. Prefrontal gray and white matter volumes in healthy aging
and Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 1999; 56:338.
290. Wagner M, Jurcoane A, Volz S, et al. Age-related changes of cerebral autoregulation: new
insights with quantitative T2'-mapping and pulsed arterial spin-labeling MR imaging.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2012; 33:2081.
291. Sugawara J, Tarumi T, Xing C, et al. Older age and male sex are associated with higher
cerebrovascular impedance. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2021; 130:172.
292. Moreno-Torres A, Pujol J, Soriano-Mas C, et al. Age-related metabolic changes in the
upper brainstem tegmentum by MR spectroscopy. Neurobiol Aging 2005; 26:1051.
293. Walhovd KB, Westlye LT, Amlien I, et al. Consistent neuroanatomical age-related volume
differences across multiple samples. Neurobiol Aging 2011; 32:916.
294. Lee NJ, Park IS, Koh I, et al. No volume difference of medulla oblongata between young
and old Korean people. Brain Res 2009; 1276:77.
295. Sastry PS, Rao KS. Apoptosis and the nervous system. J Neurochem 2000; 74:1.
296. Dorszewska J. Cell biology of normal brain aging: synaptic plasticity-cell death. Aging Clin
Exp Res 2013; 25:25.
297. van der Zee EA. Synapses, spines and kinases in mammalian learning and memory, and
the impact of aging. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2015; 50:77.
298. Terman A, Brunk UT. Lipofuscin: mechanisms of formation and increase with age. APMIS
1998; 106:265.
299. Corrada MM, Berlau DJ, Kawas CH. A population-based clinicopathological study in the
oldest-old: the 90+ study. Curr Alzheimer Res 2012; 9:709.
300. Mountz JM, Laymon CM, Cohen AD, et al. Comparison of qualitative and quantitative
imaging characteristics of [11C]PiB and [18F]flutemetamol in normal control and
Alzheimer's subjects. Neuroimage Clin 2015; 9:592.

-- 54 of 66 --

301. Schöll M, Lockhart SN, Schonhaut DR, et al. PET Imaging of Tau Deposition in the Aging
Human Brain. Neuron 2016; 89:971.
302. Wuestefeld A, Pichet Binette A, Berron D, et al. Age-related and amyloid-beta-
independent tau deposition and its downstream effects. Brain 2023; 146:3192.
303. Schliebs R, Arendt T. The cholinergic system in aging and neuronal degeneration. Behav
Brain Res 2011; 221:555.
304. Anglade P, Vyas S, Javoy-Agid F, et al. Apoptosis and autophagy in nigral neurons of
patients with Parkinson's disease. Histol Histopathol 1997; 12:25.
305. Klostermann EC, Braskie MN, Landau SM, et al. Dopamine and frontostriatal networks in
cognitive aging. Neurobiol Aging 2012; 33:623.e15.
306. Chowdhury R, Guitart-Masip M, Lambert C, et al. Dopamine restores reward prediction
errors in old age. Nat Neurosci 2013; 16:648.
307. Fjell AM, McEvoy L, Holland D, et al. What is normal in normal aging? Effects of aging,
amyloid and Alzheimer's disease on the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus. Prog
Neurobiol 2014; 117:20.
308. Reuter-Lorenz PA, Jonides J, Smith EE, et al. Age differences in the frontal lateralization of
verbal and spatial working memory revealed by PET. J Cogn Neurosci 2000; 12:174.
309. Dennis EL, Thompson PM. Functional brain connectivity using fMRI in aging and
Alzheimer's disease. Neuropsychol Rev 2014; 24:49.
310. Bernard C, Dilharreguy B, Helmer C, et al. PCC characteristics at rest in 10-year memory
decliners. Neurobiol Aging 2015; 36:2812.
311. Damoiseaux JS. Effects of aging on functional and structural brain connectivity.
Neuroimage 2017; 160:32.
312. Wilson RS, Beckett LA, Barnes LL, et al. Individual differences in rates of change in
cognitive abilities of older persons. Psychol Aging 2002; 17:179.
313. Salthouse T. Consequences of age-related cognitive declines. Annu Rev Psychol 2012;
63:201.
314. Bian Z, Andersen GJ. Aging and the perception of egocentric distance. Psychol Aging
2013; 28:813.
315. Cognitive Neuroscience of Aging: Linking Cognitive and Cerebral Aging, Cabeza R, Nyber
g L, Park D (Eds), Oxford University Press, New York 2004.
316. Draganski B, Lutti A, Kherif F. Impact of brain aging and neurodegeneration on cognition:
evidence from MRI. Curr Opin Neurol 2013; 26:640.
317. Tam HM, Lam CL, Huang H, et al. Age-related difference in relationships between
cognitive processing speed and general cognitive status. Appl Neuropsychol Adult 2015;
22:94.

-- 55 of 66 --

318. Tremblay P, Poulin J, Martel-Sauvageau V, Denis C. Age-related deficits in speech
production: From phonological planning to motor implementation. Exp Gerontol 2019;
126:110695.
319. Harada CN, Natelson Love MC, Triebel KL. Normal cognitive aging. Clin Geriatr Med 2013;
29:737.
320. Yang AC, Huang CC, Yeh HL, et al. Complexity of spontaneous BOLD activity in default
mode network is correlated with cognitive function in normal male elderly: a multiscale
entropy analysis. Neurobiol Aging 2013; 34:428.
321. Smith E, Cusack T, Blake C. The effect of a dual task on gait speed in community dwelling
older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Gait Posture 2016; 44:250.
322. Gow AJ, Johnson W, Pattie A, et al. Stability and change in intelligence from age 11 to
ages 70, 79, and 87: the Lothian Birth Cohorts of 1921 and 1936. Psychol Aging 2011;
26:232.
323. Aribisala BS, Valdés Hernández MDC, Okely JA, et al. Sleep quality, perivascular spaces
and brain health markers in ageing - A longitudinal study in the Lothian Birth Cohort
1936. Sleep Med 2023; 106:123.
324. Underwood E. Starting young. Science 2014; 346:568.
325. Petersen SE, van Mier H, Fiez JA, Raichle ME. The effects of practice on the functional
anatomy of task performance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998; 95:853.
326. Reuter-Lorenz PA, Lustig C. Brain aging: reorganizing discoveries about the aging mind.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 2005; 15:245.
327. Reuter-Lorenz PA, Cappell KA. Neurocognitive aging and the compensation hypothesis.
Curr Dir Psychol Sci 2008; 17:177.
328. Reuter-Lorenz PA, Park DC. How does it STAC up? Revisiting the scaffolding theory of
aging and cognition. Neuropsychol Rev 2014; 24:355.
329. Amieva H, Stoykova R, Matharan F, et al. What aspects of social network are protective for
dementia? Not the quantity but the quality of social interactions is protective up to 15
years later. Psychosom Med 2010; 72:905.
330. Middleton LE, Yaffe K. Promising strategies for the prevention of dementia. Arch Neurol
2009; 66:1210.
331. Ball K, Edwards JD, Ross LA. The impact of speed of processing training on cognitive and
everyday functions. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 2007; 62 Spec No 1:19.
332. Engvig A, Fjell AM, Westlye LT, et al. Effects of cognitive training on gray matter volumes
in memory clinic patients with subjective memory impairment. J Alzheimers Dis 2014;
41:779.
333. Moragas A, Castells C, Sans M. Mathematical morphologic analysis of aging-related

-- 56 of 66 --

epidermal changes. Anal Quant Cytol Histol 1993; 15:75.
334. Montagna W, Carlisle K. Structural changes in ageing skin. Br J Dermatol 1990; 122 Suppl
35:61.
335. Ashcroft GS, Mills SJ, Ashworth JJ. Ageing and wound healing. Biogerontology 2002; 3:337.
336. Yaar M, Gilchrest BA. Skin aging: postulated mechanisms and consequent changes in
structure and function. Clin Geriatr Med 2001; 17:617.
337. Varani J, Dame MK, Rittie L, et al. Decreased collagen production in chronologically aged
skin: roles of age-dependent alteration in fibroblast function and defective mechanical
stimulation. Am J Pathol 2006; 168:1861.
338. Russell-Goldman E, Murphy GF. The Pathobiology of Skin Aging: New Insights into an Old
Dilemma. Am J Pathol 2020; 190:1356.
339. Jiang F, Tohgasaki T, Kami M, et al. Influence of aging on dermal elastin fiber architecture
and skin firmness assessed by finite element modeling. Sci Rep 2025; 15:28598.
340. Uitto J. The role of elastin and collagen in cutaneous aging: intrinsic aging versus
photoexposure. J Drugs Dermatol 2008; 7:s12.
341. McGinn R, Poirier MP, Louie JC, et al. Increasing age is a major risk factor for susceptibility
to heat stress during physical activity. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2017; 42:1232.
342. Anderson RK, Kenney WL. Effect of age on heat-activated sweat gland density and flow
during exercise in dry heat. J Appl Physiol (1985) 1987; 63:1089.
343. Inbar O, Morris N, Epstein Y, Gass G. Comparison of thermoregulatory responses to
exercise in dry heat among prepubertal boys, young adults and older males. Exp Physiol
2004; 89:691.
344. McKenna ZJ, Atkins WC, Sarma S, et al. Evaluating low-energy cooling strategies on
thermal and cardiac strain in older adults exposed to very hot and dry heat with
accompanying activities of daily living. J Appl Physiol (1985) 2025; 139:206.
345. Perry SD. Evaluation of age-related plantar-surface insensitivity and onset age of
advanced insensitivity in older adults using vibratory and touch sensation tests. Neurosci
Lett 2006; 392:62.
346. Matsuoka S, Suzuki H, Morioka S, et al. Quantitative and qualitative studies of Meissner's
corpuscles in human skin, with special reference to alterations caused by aging. J
Dermatol 1983; 10:205.
347. Gescheider GA, Bolanowski SJ, Hall KL, et al. The effects of aging on information-
processing channels in the sense of touch: I. Absolute sensitivity. Somatosens Mot Res
1994; 11:345.
348. Holick MF, Matsuoka LY, Wortsman J. Age, vitamin D, and solar ultraviolet. Lancet 1989;
2:1104.

-- 57 of 66 --

349. Ressler S, Bartkova J, Niederegger H, et al. p16INK4A is a robust in vivo biomarker of
cellular aging in human skin. Aging Cell 2006; 5:379.
350. Myers T, Song SJ, Chen Y, et al. Chronological age estimation from human microbiomes
with transformer-based Robust Principal Component Analysis. Commun Biol 2025;
8:1159.
351. McCullough JL, Kelly KM. Prevention and treatment of skin aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2006;
1067:323.
352. Griffiths CE. The role of retinoids in the prevention and repair of aged and photoaged
skin. Clin Exp Dermatol 2001; 26:613.
353. Shibagaki N, Suda W, Clavaud C, et al. Aging-related changes in the diversity of women's
skin microbiomes associated with oral bacteria. Sci Rep 2017; 7:10567.
354. Van Haeringen NJ. Aging and the lacrimal system. Br J Ophthalmol 1997; 81:824.
355. Schnohr P, Nyboe J, Lange P, Jensen G. Longevity and gray hair, baldness, facial wrinkles,
and arcus senilis in 13,000 men and women: the Copenhagen City Heart Study. J Gerontol
A Biol Sci Med Sci 1998; 53:M347.
356. Salvi SM, Akhtar S, Currie Z. Ageing changes in the eye. Postgrad Med J 2006; 82:581.
357. Bishop PN, Holmes DF, Kadler KE, et al. Age-related changes on the surface of vitreous
collagen fibrils. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2004; 45:1041.
358. Wang JH, Wong RCB, Liu GS. Retinal Aging Transcriptome and Cellular Landscape in
Association With the Progression of Age-Related Macular Degeneration. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2023; 64:32.
359. Allaf AM, Wang J, Simms AG, Jiang H. Age-related alterations in retinal capillary function.
Microvasc Res 2023; 148:104508.
360. Strenk SA, Strenk LM, Koretz JF. The mechanism of presbyopia. Prog Retin Eye Res 2005;
24:379.
361. Liem AT, Keunen JE, van Norren D, van de Kraats J. Rod densitometry in the aging human
eye. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 1991; 32:2676.
362. Silvestre D, Arleo A, Allard R. Healthy Aging Impairs Photon Absorption Efficiency of
Cones. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 2019; 60:544.
363. McKendrick AM, Chan YM, Nguyen BN. Spatial vision in older adults: perceptual changes
and neural bases. Ophthalmic Physiol Opt 2018; 38:363.
364. Brewster KK, Deal JA, Lin FR, Rutherford BR. Considering hearing loss as a modifiable risk
factor for dementia. Expert Rev Neurother 2022; 22:805.
365. Marinelli JP, Lohse CM, Fussell WL, et al. Association between hearing loss and
development of dementia using formal behavioural audiometric testing within the Mayo

-- 58 of 66 --

Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA): a prospective population-based study. Lancet Healthy
Longev 2022; 3:e817.
366. Gates GA, Mills JH. Presbycusis. Lancet 2005; 366:1111.
367. Howarth A, Shone GR. Ageing and the auditory system. Postgrad Med J 2006; 82:166.
368. Martin JS, Jerger JF. Some effects of aging on central auditory processing. J Rehabil Res
Dev 2005; 42:25.
369. Lazard DS, Doelling KB, Arnal LH. Plasticity After Hearing Rehabilitation in the Aging
Brain. Trends Hear 2023; 27:23312165231156412.
370. Andries E, Bosmans J, Engelborghs S, et al. Evaluation of Cognitive Functioning Before
and After Cochlear Implantation in Adults Aged 55 Years and Older at Risk for Mild
Cognitive Impairment. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2023; 149:310.
371. Mojet J, Christ-Hazelhof E, Heidema J. Taste perception with age: generic or specific losses
in threshold sensitivity to the five basic tastes? Chem Senses 2001; 26:845.
372. Gudziol H, Hummel T. Normative values for the assessment of gustatory function using
liquid tastants. Acta Otolaryngol 2007; 127:658.
373. Boyce JM, Shone GR. Effects of ageing on smell and taste. Postgrad Med J 2006; 82:239.
374. Stevens JC, Cain WS, Schiet FT, Oatley MW. Olfactory adaptation and recovery in old age.
Perception 1989; 18:265.
375. Giezenaar C, Chapman I, Luscombe-Marsh N, et al. Ageing Is Associated with Decreases
in Appetite and Energy Intake--A Meta-Analysis in Healthy Adults. Nutrients 2016; 8.
376. Franceschi C. Inflammaging as a major characteristic of old people: can it be prevented
or cured? Nutr Rev 2007; 65:S173.
377. Liao CY, Rikke BA, Johnson TE, et al. Genetic variation in the murine lifespan response to
dietary restriction: from life extension to life shortening. Aging Cell 2010; 9:92.
378. Mattison JA, Roth GS, Beasley TM, et al. Impact of caloric restriction on health and
survival in rhesus monkeys from the NIA study. Nature 2012; 489:318.
379. Colman RJ, Anderson RM, Johnson SC, et al. Caloric restriction delays disease onset and
mortality in rhesus monkeys. Science 2009; 325:201.
380. Aon MA, Bernier M, Mitchell SJ, et al. Untangling Determinants of Enhanced Health and
Lifespan through a Multi-omics Approach in Mice. Cell Metab 2020; 32:100.
381. Lee HW, Blasco MA, Gottlieb GJ, et al. Essential role of mouse telomerase in highly
proliferative organs. Nature 1998; 392:569.
382. Rudolph KL, Chang S, Lee HW, et al. Longevity, stress response, and cancer in aging
telomerase-deficient mice. Cell 1999; 96:701.
383. Salpea KD, Humphries SE. Telomere length in atherosclerosis and diabetes.
Atherosclerosis 2010; 209:35.

-- 59 of 66 --

384. Zhu Y, Armstrong JL, Tchkonia T, Kirkland JL. Cellular senescence and the senescent
secretory phenotype in age-related chronic diseases. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care
2014; 17:324.
385. Hoare M, Narita M. Transmitting senescence to the cell neighbourhood. Nat Cell Biol
2013; 15:887.
386. Schafer MJ, Haak AJ, Tschumperlin DJ, LeBrasseur NK. Targeting Senescent Cells in
Fibrosis: Pathology, Paradox, and Practical Considerations. Curr Rheumatol Rep 2018;
20:3.
387. Amaya-Montoya M, Pérez-Londoño A, Guatibonza-García V, et al. Cellular Senescence as a
Therapeutic Target for Age-Related Diseases: A Review. Adv Ther 2020; 37:1407.
388. Matsubayashi S, Ito S, Araya J, Kuwano K. Drugs against metabolic diseases as potential
senotherapeutics for aging-related respiratory diseases. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
2023; 14:1079626.
389. Amor C, Feucht J, Leibold J, et al. Senolytic CAR T cells reverse senescence-associated
pathologies. Nature 2020; 583:127.
390. Sahin E, Colla S, Liesa M, et al. Telomere dysfunction induces metabolic and
mitochondrial compromise. Nature 2011; 470:359.
391. Miller RA, Harrison DE, Astle CM, et al. Rapamycin, but not resveratrol or simvastatin,
extends life span of genetically heterogeneous mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2011;
66:191.
392. López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, et al. Hallmarks of aging: An expanding universe.
Cell 2023; 186:243.
393. Forman DE, Kuchel GA, Newman JC, et al. Impact of Geroscience on Therapeutic
Strategies for Older Adults With Cardiovascular Disease: JACC Scientific Statement. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2023; 82:631.
394. Walter LC, Covinsky KE. Cancer screening in elderly patients: a framework for
individualized decision making. JAMA 2001; 285:2750.
395. Glaser R, Marinopoulos S, Dimitrakakis C. Breast cancer treatment in women over the
age of 80: A tailored approach. Maturitas 2018; 110:29.
396. Newman AB, Arnold AM, Sachs MC, et al. Long-term function in an older cohort--the
cardiovascular health study all stars study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009; 57:432.
397. Britton A, Shipley M, Singh-Manoux A, Marmot MG. Successful aging: the contribution of
early-life and midlife risk factors. J Am Geriatr Soc 2008; 56:1098.
398. Perls TT, Wilmoth J, Levenson R, et al. Life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings
of centenarians. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002; 99:8442.
399. Atzmon G, Rincon M, Rabizadeh P, Barzilai N. Biological evidence for inheritance of

-- 60 of 66 --

exceptional longevity. Mech Ageing Dev 2005; 126:341.
400. Libina N, Berman JR, Kenyon C. Tissue-specific activities of C. elegans DAF-16 in the
regulation of lifespan. Cell 2003; 115:489.
401. Franceschi C, Motta L, Valensin S, et al. Do men and women follow different trajectories
to reach extreme longevity? Italian Multicenter Study on Centenarians (IMUSCE). Aging
(Milano) 2000; 12:77.
402. Willcox DC, Willcox BJ, Todoriki H, et al. Caloric restriction and human longevity: what can
we learn from the Okinawans? Biogerontology 2006; 7:173.
403. Willcox BJ, Willcox DC, He Q, et al. Siblings of Okinawan centenarians share lifelong
mortality advantages. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2006; 61:345.
404. Ji H, Kwan AC, Chen MT, et al. Sex Differences in Myocardial and Vascular Aging. Circ Res
2022; 130:566.
405. Miller RA, Harrison DE, Allison DB, et al. Canagliflozin extends life span in genetically
heterogeneous male but not female mice. JCI Insight 2020; 5.
406. Miller RA, Harrison DE, Astle CM, et al. Rapamycin-mediated lifespan increase in mice is
dose and sex dependent and metabolically distinct from dietary restriction. Aging Cell
2014; 13:468.
Topic 14605 Version 35.0

-- 61 of 66 --

GRAPHICS
Figure 1: Homeostenosis
Based on information from: Taffet GE. Physiology of aging. In: Cassel CK, Leipzig RM, Cohen HJ, et al [eds]. Geriatric Medicine:
An Evidence-Based Approach, 4th ed. New York, Springer, 2003.
Graphic 58907 Version 9.0

-- 62 of 66 --

Table 1: Renal changes with aging
Anatomic
Decrease in renal mass, mostly from cortex
Increased renal fat and fibrosis
Sclerosis of cortical nephrons with longest loops of Henle
Functional
Decreased renal blood flow
Impaired vasodilation in response to dopamine
Decreased creatinine clearance
Impaired sodium excretion and conservation
Decreased potassium excretion and conservation
Decreased concentrating and diluting capacity
Impaired excretion of acid loads
Decreased serum renin and aldosterone
Altered intrarenal nitric oxide actions
Increased dependence on renal prostaglandins to maintain intrarenal perfusion
Decreased vitamin D activation
Increased vulnerability to dye, ischemia, or other insults
Impaired recovery after insults
Data from: Taffet GE. Physiology of aging. In: Geriatric Medicine: An Evidence-Based Approach, Cassel CK, Leipzig RM, Cohen HJ,
et al (Eds), 4th ed, Springer, New York 2003.
Graphic 68244 Version 1.0

-- 63 of 66 --

Figure 2: Pulmonary function with age
TLC: total lung capacity; VC: vital capacity; IC: inspiratory capacity; ERV: expiratory reserve volume; RV:
residual volume; FRC: functional residual capacity.
Modified and reproduced with permission from: Janssens JP, Pache JC, Nicod LP. Physiological changes in respiratory function
associated with ageing. Eur Respir J 1999; 13:197. Copyright © 1999 European Respiratory Society. All rights reserved.
Graphic 67608 Version 6.0

-- 64 of 66 --

Table 2: Life expectancy by age
Ages in years
70 	75 	80 	85 	90 	95
Women - Years of expected life
Top 25 percentile 	21.3 	17 	13 	9.6 	6.8 	4.8
50 percentile 	15.7 	11.9 	8.6 	5.9 	3.9 	2.7
Lowest 25 percentile 	9.5 	6.8 	4.6 	2.9 	1.8 	1.1
Men - Years of expected life
Top 25 percentile 	18 	14.2 	10.8 	7.9 	5.8 	4.3
50 percentile 	12.4 	9.3 	6.7 	4.7 	3.2 	2.3
Lowest 25 percentile 	6.7 	4.9 	3.3 	2.2 	1.5 	1
Data from: Walter LC, Covinsky KE. Cancer screening in elderly patients: a framework for individualized decision making. JAMA
2001; 285:2750.
Graphic 53094 Version 3.0
th
th
th
th
th
th

-- 65 of 66 --

Contributor Disclosures
George E Taffet, MD Stock Options: Animatus Biosciences [Stem cells]. Grant/Research/Clinical Trial
Support: Indus Instruments [Activity and cardiac function]. All of the relevant financial relationships
listed have been mitigated. Kenneth E Schmader, MD No relevant financial relationship(s) with
ineligible companies to disclose. Jane Givens, MD, MSCE No relevant financial relationship(s) with
ineligible companies to disclose.
Contributor disclosures are reviewed for conflicts of interest by the editorial group. When found, these
are addressed by vetting through a multi-level review process, and through requirements for references
to be provided to support the content. Appropriately referenced content is required of all authors and
must conform to UpToDate standards of evidence.
Conflict of interest policy


-- 66 of 66 --

