Official reprint from UpToDate
www.uptodate.com © 2026 UpToDate, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All Rights Reserved.
Overview of preventive care in adults
INTRODUCTION
Quality health care for individuals includes two fundamental elements: appropriate treatment
for current illness and appropriate preventive care to attempt to lessen future health decline.
Preventive health care is an important aspect of medical practice, leading to significant
improvements in overall health [1].
Several issues are involved in providing effective preventive care. Clinicians need to prioritize
and decide which of the many available preventive services to recommend and which to
discourage to prevent harm from inappropriate tests or interventions. Clinicians also must
find a way to deliver preventive services efficiently within the context of a busy clinical
practice.
This topic will discuss the approach to prevention and how to prioritize preventive services. It
will also summarize primary prevention and screening recommendations primarily targeting
United States adults <65 years old. The recommendations are a compilation of those from
individual UpToDate topics, in which the rationale and evidence base for the
recommendations are provided.
Preventive care in certain populations and disease-specific screening recommendations are
discussed in more detail in specific topic reviews. As examples:
®
AUTHOR: Anthony J Viera, MD, MPH
SECTION EDITOR: Joann G Elmore, MD, MPH
DEPUTY EDITOR: Sara Swenson, MD
All topics are updated as new evidence becomes available and our peer review process is complete.
Literature review current through: Aug 2026.
This topic last updated: Jul 28, 2026.
Pregnant persons. (See "Prenatal care: Initial assessment" and "Prenatal care: Second and
third trimesters".)
●
Gay men. (See "Primary care of gay men and men who have sex with men".)	●

-- 1 of 81 --

Basic epidemiologic principles of screening in adults are presented elsewhere. (See "Evidence-
based approach to prevention".)
PRIORITIZING PREVENTIVE SERVICES
Preventive services should focus on priority health problems and effective interventions.
Rather than performing a standardized comprehensive examination ("full physical") on all
patients, clinicians should individualize screening and prevention interventions to maximize
value, which encompasses the tradeoffs between benefits, harms, and costs [2,3].
We recommend referring to the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
website for the most up-to-date screening recommendations based on systematic
reviews of available evidence. We provide a review of screening, prevention, and counseling
recommendations for older adults elsewhere. (See "Geriatric health maintenance".)
Factors to consider — Priority services may differ from patient to patient depending on age,
sex, and other risk factors. The effects of recommended preventive interventions on longevity
or quality of life vary widely, and the potential beneficial effect of any one intervention on an
individual patient varies with their lifestyle, medical and family history, and other risk factors
[4]. Available tools to help clinicians prioritize preventive services include:
Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). (See "Primary care of adults with HIV".)	●
Cancer survivors. (See "Overview of cancer survivorship care for primary care and oncology
providers".)
●
Patients with diabetes mellitus. (See "Overview of general medical care in nonpregnant
adults with diabetes mellitus".)
●
Older adults. (See "Geriatric health maintenance" and "Evidence-based approach to
prevention".)
●
Transgender men and women. (See "Transgender women: Evaluation and management"
and "Transgender men: Evaluation and management" and "Primary care of transgender
individuals".)
●
The Partnership for Prevention, which ranks preventive services based on the clinically
preventable burden of disease and the cost-effectiveness of interventions [5]. The list
includes aspirin chemoprophylaxis to reduce cardiovascular events, childhood
immunizations, and smoking cessation advice.
●
The USPSTF provides a convenient tool to identify recommended patient-specific
preventive services based on a patient's sex, age, pregnancy status, and tobacco use and
●

-- 2 of 81 --

As with all clinical decisions, patient preferences are also of prime importance [6]. Risks and
benefits should be communicated to patients in a way that they can understand, which can be
challenging because many patients have a limited understanding of probabilities. A 2014
systematic review found that patients are better able to understand absolute than relative
risks and that visual aids can be helpful [7]. Studies also suggest that patients tend to
overestimate the benefits and underestimate the harms of interventions (including screening
tests) [8].
Further, scheduled preventive interventions (eg, cancer screenings) may need to be deferred
due to intercurrent individual illness or a larger public health crisis (eg, epidemic or pandemic
infectious disease) [9]. In such circumstances, patients should be reassured that preventive
interventions will be resumed when appropriate. Cancer screening during the coronavirus
pandemic is discussed elsewhere. (See "COVID-19: Considerations in patients with cancer",
section on 'Impact of the pandemic on cancer screening'.)
Overview of USPSTF recommendations — The United States Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) publishes evidence-based recommendations for multiple clinical preventive services
based on systematic reviews, each of which is graded based on a set of definitions [10,11].
Harms of screening — There are harms associated with screening, including anxiety
produced by false-positive screening tests, harms associated with diagnostic testing after a
whether they are sexually active.
USPSTF A and B level recommendations – The USPSTF recommends certain screening
and counseling interventions either with high certainty that the net benefit is substantial
("grade A"), with high certainty that the net benefit is moderate, or with moderate certainty
that the net benefit is moderate to substantial ("grade B"). These grade A and B level
recommendations should be offered to patients.
●
USPSTF C level recommendations – Preventive services for which there is at least moderate
certainty that the net benefit is small are rated as "grade C." The USPSTF recommends
selectively offering or providing these services to individual patients based on professional
judgment, patient preferences, and individual circumstances.
●
USPSTF D level recommendations – Preventive services for which there is moderate or high
certainty that the service has no net benefit or that the harms outweigh the benefits are
rated as "grade D." The USPSTF recommends against these services.
●
USPSTF level I recommendations – Preventive services for which the balance of benefits and
harms cannot be determined, due to lack of sufficient evidence or poor-quality or
conflicting evidence, are rated as "grade I." If the service is offered, patients should
understand the uncertainty about the balance of benefits and harms.
●

-- 3 of 81 --

positive screening test, overdiagnosis of conditions that may be treated but would never have
become clinically apparent, and cost [12-14]. Comorbid conditions may decrease the benefits
and increase the harms associated with screening [15]. The benefits of screening may
decrease as patients get older, particularly for cancer screening [16]. Cancer screening in
older adults is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Geriatric health maintenance", section on
'Cancer screening'.)
Clinicians should make sure that patients understand the potential harms prior to screening
and consider comorbidities when discussing screening. Patients may weigh the potential
benefits and harms of screening and, in some cases, decide against screening. This is a
reasonable decision that should be accepted by clinicians. The optimal screening rate is less
than 100 percent when patients are adequately counseled regarding the potential benefits
and harms of screening.
Screening of patients who are unlikely to benefit from screening is common. As an example,
in an observational study including 27,000 patients ≥65 years, 31 to 55 percent of those with
≥75 percent risk of nine-year mortality had received prostate, breast, cervical, or colorectal
cancer screening within the previous two to five years [17].
HOW TO EFFICIENTLY DELIVER PREVENTION
Periodic "check-up" — There are no strict guidelines for the optimal frequency of periodic
visits, and there is no evidence on which to base optimal frequency recommendations [18].
Annual examinations are not indicated for most younger patients, although people with
chronic health issues (such as diabetes) warrant regular visits, with or without a periodic
health maintenance visit, independent of age [19]. In the absence of such indications, we
suggest periodic health maintenance visits every three years for adult patients ≤49 years
without chronic conditions and annually for adults ≥50 years. For people who have no chronic
conditions and rarely see a clinician, a periodic health evaluation visit may be the only
opportunity to discuss preventive care.
Preventive counseling and services are important components of the periodic health check-up
[20-22]. Preventive services are more likely to be discussed when patients have an established
relationship with an identified clinician. Studies have shown that patients who were
connected to a specific clinician have higher rates of preventive services received [22-25].
Patients with more visits to their primary care providers were more likely to undergo
screening for colorectal and breast cancer, have lower incidence and mortality of colorectal
and breast cancer, and have lower overall mortality. Periodic visits may have other benefits,
such as developing the patient-clinician relationship, relieving patient "worry," and educating
patients about how to access the health care system [21,26].

-- 4 of 81 --

In a 2014 meta-analysis including six randomized trials, general practice-based health checks
did not decrease mortality but improved surrogate outcomes (blood pressure control,
decreases in total cholesterol and body mass index [BMI]), especially in high-risk patients [27].
In another meta-analysis including 14 randomized trials and over 180,000 participants, there
was no beneficial effect of general health checks on total, cardiovascular, or cancer mortality
despite increased detection of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia as well as increased
use of antihypertensives [28]. However, some methodologic problems of the included trials
(including the age of some trials, which predated the routine use of statins) may limit the
interpretation of the results.
Discussing stopping or reducing screening — Changes to recommendations that result in a
decrease in the intensity of screening or discontinuing screening for those patients with
reduced likelihood of benefit may be problematic for patients. In particular, patients may be
confused by these changes, especially if they view screening as something they can do to
protect themselves from a feared condition [3]. How best to explain the rationale for less
intensive or discontinued screening can be challenging. Although we know of no easy formula
for conducting these discussions, some general suggestions may be useful:
The idea that screening programs can result in harm is often new to patients. Patients
should be educated that the primary issue underlying any screening recommendation is
the balance between the likelihood of benefit and the risk of harm. A discussion of
hypothetical examples that illustrate how screening may lead to unnecessary, difficult, and
possibly risky diagnostic procedures (such as lung biopsy) or treatment (such as
chemotherapy for cancer that would not have become clinically apparent over the patient's
lifetime) may be helpful.
●
One may acknowledge the patient's interest in preserving health and longevity and refocus
the patient away from more intensive or longer screening toward other prevention
activities that bring a higher likelihood of benefit.
●
For older patients with limited life expectancy, it may also be useful to start the discussion
of stopping screening some years before actually stopping. Older patients, advised over
years that screening is an important part of medical care, may view stopping screening as
an indication that they are no longer "worth" the expense or effort [29]. Again, hypothetical
stories may be used to illustrate the reality that the probability of benefit from screening
decreases and the probability of harm from overdiagnosis increases in older individuals. In
addition, harm occurs soon after screening, while any benefit occurs only years after
screening. For example, for colorectal cancer and breast cancer screening, a patient must
live 10 years to have a 1 in 1000 probability of having their life extended and 16 years to
have a 2 in 1000 probability [30]. If a patient is overdiagnosed, however, they receive
unnecessary treatment (often including surgery) soon after diagnosis.
●

-- 5 of 81 --

Supportive office systems — Creative approaches using office systems can assist in
delivering needed preventive care [31]. As an example, practices have successfully used
databases of eligible patients (eg, for flu shots, mammograms, diabetic eye examinations, etc)
and automatic reminders to outreach to patients and assist in delivering routine preventive
care [32]. In one study of interventions to promote screening for colorectal cancer, mailings to
patients were somewhat more effective than electronic reminders to clinicians [33]. Finally,
using decision aids and/or training medical assistants to discuss important preventive
services before a visit with a clinician can be more efficient and effective for helping patients
make informed decisions [34].
CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE PREVENTION
Cardiovascular risk assessment — Patients aged ≥20 years should undergo cardiovascular
risk assessment every three to five years.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk can be estimated using one of several widely available tools,
each with advantages and disadvantages. While all of the risk assessment tools have
advantages and disadvantages, no single tool will be appropriate for all patients. We
encourage clinicians to become familiar with and use a CVD risk calculator that has been
locally endorsed and that has been validated for their locale and for patient-specific race and
ethnic groups. (See "Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk assessment for primary
prevention in adults" and "Cardiovascular disease risk assessment for primary prevention:
Risk calculators".)
The major risk factors for CVD that are modifiable include (see "Overview of primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults"):
Diet. (See "Healthy diet in adults".)	●
Smoking. (See "Cardiovascular risk of smoking and benefits of smoking cessation".)	●
Hypertension. (See "Cardiovascular risks of hypertension".)	●
Dyslipidemia. (See "Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol-lowering therapy in the primary
prevention of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease".)
●
Obesity. (See "Overweight and obesity in adults: Health consequences", section on
'Cardiovascular'.)
●
Physical activity. (See "The benefits and risks of aerobic exercise", section on 'Cardiovascular
disease'.)
●

-- 6 of 81 --

Screening for coronary artery disease in patients with risk factors is discussed in detail
elsewhere. (See "Screening for coronary heart disease".)
Hypertension — Hypertension screening is recommended for adults ≥18 years of age [35,36].
The optimal interval for screening for hypertension is not known. Most patients have their
blood pressure checked at each primary care visit.
The 2021 United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines recommend
hypertension screening every year for adults ≥40 years and for those who are at high risk for
high blood pressure (eg, patients with mean daytime blood pressure 130 to 139/80 to 89
mmHg, those with overweight or obesity, and African American individuals) [37,38]. Adults
aged 18 to 39 years without elevated blood pressure (ie, <130/80 mmHg) and without CVD
risk factors should be rescreened every three to five years. The USPSTF recommends
obtaining out-of-office blood pressure measurements to confirm a diagnosis of hypertension
before starting treatment. (See "Hypertension in adults: Blood pressure measurement and
diagnosis", section on 'Screening for hypertension'.)
Recommendations for target blood pressure and
treatment differ based on several factors, including
patient age, comorbidities, and method of blood
pressure measurement ( table 1). (See
"Hypertension in adults: Blood pressure
measurement and diagnosis" and "Hypertension in
adults: Goal blood pressure".)
Hyperlipidemia
Diabetes mellitus. (See "Prevalence of and risk factors for coronary heart disease in patients
with diabetes mellitus", section on 'Prevalence and extent of increased risk'.)
●
We suggest that patients aged 17 to 21 years
undergo one-time screening for hyperlipidemia
with a nonfasting non-high-density lipoprotein
(non-HDL) cholesterol; non-HDL cholesterol is
the difference between total cholesterol and HDL
cholesterol [39]. (See "Dyslipidemia in children
and adolescents: Definition, screening, and diagnosis".)
●
For patients with a normal screen before age 21 who are also at high risk, we suggest
screening for lipid abnormalities starting at age 25 for men and 35 for women. We consider
patients at high risk if they have more than one risk factor (eg, diabetes, hypertension,
smoking, family history) or a single risk factor that is severe (eg, several siblings with
coronary artery disease in their 40s, a very heavy smoker).
●
Definition of hypertension based on
blood pressure measurement
strategy
Table 1 - larger image below

-- 7 of 81 --

In patients whose lipid measurements place them well below the threshold for treatment
(including lifestyle modification or lifestyle modification plus pharmacologic therapy), we
suggest repeating measurements every five years. In patients who have had multiple lipid
screenings with acceptable measurements, we suggest stopping screening at age 65.
Ongoing assessment of cardiovascular risk can be based on other risk factors and earlier lipid
levels. (See "Screening for lipid disorders in adults".)
When a decision is made to screen lipids to assess cardiovascular risk, we suggest measuring
the total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol rather than a complete lipid profile or other lipid
marker or fractions. Testing for total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol does not require a
fasting test. (See "Screening for lipid disorders in adults", section on 'Choice of tests'.)
Obesity — We suggest screening all patients for obesity with a body mass index (BMI) and
counseling all patients to maintain a healthy body weight (calculator 1). Selection of patients
for treatment should be based on BMI and risk factor assessment. (See "Obesity in adults:
Prevalence, screening, and evaluation" and "Obesity in adults: Overview of management".)
Physical activity — It has been estimated that up to one-third of CVD deaths may be
preventable by a healthy diet and physical activity [40]. We suggest counseling patients about
exercise to promote the maintenance of a healthy weight and physical activity for all patients.
(See "The benefits and risks of aerobic exercise" and "Exercise and fitness in the prevention of
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease".)
Diabetes mellitus — For adults ages 35 to 70 years who are at increased risk for diabetes
and/or have cardiovascular risk factors ( table 2), we suggest screening for type 2 diabetes
as part of cardiovascular risk assessment [41]. (See "Screening for type 2 diabetes mellitus
and prediabetes".)
We use glycated hemoglobin (A1C) for diabetes screening because it correlates best with
rates of future diabetes and diabetes complications. Alternative strategies include using
fasting plasma glucose with or without simultaneous A1C testing. (See "Screening for type 2
diabetes mellitus and prediabetes", section on 'Screening tests'.)
Aspirin for primary prevention — Decisions regarding aspirin for primary prevention of CVD
should be made on an individual basis. Factors to be considered are discussed in detail
elsewhere. (See "Aspirin in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease and cancer".)
Routine electrocardiogram — A routine electrocardiogram, even for a "baseline," is not
indicated in asymptomatic adults at low risk for CVD. (See "Screening for coronary heart
disease", section on 'Resting ECG and ambulatory ECG monitoring'.)
For patients with a normal screen before age 21 who are not at high risk, we suggest
screening for lipid abnormalities starting at age 35 for men and 45 for women.
●

-- 8 of 81 --

Nontraditional measures — Coronary artery calcium testing may be useful as a complement
to CVD risk assessment in select patients (see "Coronary artery calcium (CAC) scoring:
Overview and clinical utilization"). We do not recommend screening low-risk patients with
other nontraditional measures (eg, C-reactive protein, carotid artery intima-media thickness,
homocysteine, or lipoprotein[a]).
However, as discussed separately, these measures may be warranted for patients without
known CVD who are at intermediate risk for CVD and for whom a more definite estimate of
CVD risk would change management:
CANCER PREVENTION
General cancer prevention counseling — A number of measures can be taken to prevent
cancer, including:
General measures for cancer prevention are discussed in more detail separately. (See
"Overview of cancer prevention".)
Tobacco use — Smoking tobacco products (primarily cigarettes) is the most important risk
factor for the development of lung cancer and contributes to a large burden of disease,
including other malignancies, cardiovascular disease (CVD), and pulmonary disease. (See
"Cigarette smoking and other possible risk factors for lung cancer" and "Cardiovascular risk of
smoking and benefits of smoking cessation" and "Overview of cancer prevention", section on
'Tobacco use'.)
C-reactive protein. (See "C-reactive protein in cardiovascular disease".)	●
Carotid artery intima-media thickness. (See "Carotid intima-media thickness".)	●
Homocysteine. (See "Overview of homocysteine".)	●
Lipoprotein(a). (See "Lipoprotein(a)".)	●
Avoidance of tobacco (see 'Tobacco use' below)	●
Being physically active	●
Maintaining a healthy weight	●
Eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains and low in saturated/trans fat	●
Limiting alcohol consumption	●
Protecting against sexually transmitted infections (including receiving human
papillomavirus [HPV] vaccination)
●
Avoiding excess sun exposure	●

-- 9 of 81 --

We recommend that clinicians ask all patients whether they use tobacco and in what form.
Smoking status should be documented; for all patients who use tobacco, clinicians should
offer the advice to quit; assess the patient's interest in quitting; and, for those interested in
quitting, offer the necessary tools (including behavioral intervention and pharmacotherapy),
techniques, and follow-up [42]. (See "Overview of smoking cessation management in adults".)
CANCER SCREENING
Breast cancer — Major risk factors for breast
cancer in women are age, genetic predisposition,
and estrogen exposure ( table 3). Evaluation for
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndromes
should be considered in all individuals with a
personal or family history that is concerning. (See
"Factors that modify breast cancer risk in females"
and "Screening for breast cancer: Strategies and
recommendations", section on 'Role of risk
prediction models'.)
Family history – All individuals at risk for
hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndromes
should be identified by taking a thorough
personal and family history, focusing on both
biologic sides of the family ( table 4). Patients with concerning family history should be
referred to a genetic counselor for a formal genetic assessment. Recommendations for
screening in patients with a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome are discussed
in detail elsewhere. (See "Overview of hereditary breast, ovarian, pancreatic and prostatic
cancer syndromes" and "Cancer risks and management in BRCA1/2 carriers".)
●
Screening for average-risk individuals – Clinicians should address breast cancer screening
starting at age 40, noting that guidelines differ on recommendations for patients under 50
( table 5). (See "Screening for breast cancer: Strategies and recommendations", section
on 'Age 40 to 49 years'.)
●
The decision to perform screening mammography should be determined by individual
patient risk and values through shared decision-making. It should be emphasized that the
relative benefits and harms of screening change as an individual gets older. The absolute
benefits, in terms of numbers of lives saved, are lower for younger compared with older
people because of both decreased incidence of breast cancer and sensitivity of
mammography in younger patients. (See "Screening for breast cancer: Strategies and
Risk and protective factors for
developing breast cancer
Table 3 - larger image below

-- 10 of 81 --

We suggest that those being screened for breast cancer not undergo clinical breast
examination.
We suggest that breast self-examination not be performed, except by those who express a
desire to do so and who have received careful instruction to differentiate normal tissue from
suspicious lumps. (See "Screening for breast cancer: Evidence for effectiveness and harms",
section on 'Breast self-examination'.)
Cervical cancer — Cervical cancer screening is recommended for all individuals with a cervix,
as discussed separately. Individuals who have had a total hysterectomy (ie, hysterectomy with
removal of the cervix) for reasons other than cervical cancer or high-grade cervical cancer
precursors do not need to be screened. (See "Cervical cancer screening: Benefits, harms,
screening methods, and patient risk groups" and "Cervical cancer screening in resource-
abundant settings: How to screen average-risk patients".)
Screening refers to testing in patients who have had all prior normal results. Patients who
have had prior abnormal results require surveillance, and the recommended options and
frequency differ based on the patient's previous results and underlying risk for developing
cervical cancer. (See "Cervical cancer screening in resource-abundant settings: How to screen
average-risk patients", section on 'Follow-up of abnormal results'.)
recommendations", section on 'Shared medical decision-making' and "Screening for breast
cancer: Strategies and recommendations", section on 'Benefits and harms of screening'.)
All patients should receive counseling about the benefits and harms of screening and
understand that mammography is associated with a substantial risk for false-positive
findings and overdiagnosis. Given declining mortality rates from breast cancer after
advances in treatment protocols, some people may choose to forego screening.
For those who choose to undergo screening, the ideal interval for screening mammography
is not known. We suggest screening every one to two years, depending on patient
preference. (See "Screening for breast cancer: Strategies and recommendations", section on
'Average risk: Screening'.)
Age to stop screening – We suggest that breast cancer screening with mammography be
continued as long as an individual has a life expectancy of at least 10 years.
●
Persons at high risk – Persons at high risk of cervical cancer include those who are
immunocompromised, have HIV infection, or have experienced in utero exposure to
diethylstilbestrol. Screening recommendations for these individuals are reviewed
elsewhere. (See "Screening for cervical cancer in patients with HIV infection and other
immunocompromised states".)
●
Persons at average risk	●

-- 11 of 81 --

Ovarian cancer — A family history is essential to identifying patients at high risk for ovarian
cancer who might benefit from further evaluation. This is described in detail separately. (See
"Screening for ovarian cancer", section on 'Family history'.)
Screening for ovarian cancer is not recommended for individuals at average risk. (See
"Screening for ovarian cancer", section on 'Average-risk patients'.)
Colorectal cancer — The age of initiation and frequency of colorectal cancer screening vary
with the risk:
Age to initiate screening – For average-risk people, most screening guidelines in
resource-abundant settings recommend initiating cervical cancer screening between
ages 21 and 25 years, but the specific age to start screening varies. (See "Cervical cancer
screening in resource-abundant settings: How to screen average-risk patients", section on
'Age to initiate screening'.)
•
Age to discontinue screening – The age at which to discontinue screening varies based
on the patient's prior cervical cancer screening results, life expectancy, and individual
preferences. Guidelines in the United States recommend stopping screening after age 65
years in patients at average risk who had previously had adequate cervical cancer
screening with normal results, as defined separately. (See "Cervical cancer screening in
resource-abundant settings: How to screen average-risk patients", section on
'Discontinuing screening'.)
•
Type and frequency of screening – Test options for cervical cancer screening include
primary human papillomavirus (HPV) testing by the clinician or the patient (ie, "self-
testing"), cervical cytology, and cotesting with cytology and HPV. The frequency of
screening depends on the specific test. The selection among different testing strategies
and evidence regarding their efficacy are discussed separately. (See "Cervical cancer
screening in resource-abundant settings: How to screen average-risk patients", section on
'Testing method and frequency' and "Cervical cancer screening: Benefits, harms,
screening methods, and patient risk groups", section on 'Screening methods'.)
•
No risk factors – We recommend that average-risk patients aged 45 and older be screened
for colorectal cancer. We suggest that screening be continued until the life expectancy for
an individual patient is estimated as less than 10 years. For most patients, it is reasonable
to stop screening at age 75 years or 85 years at the latest. One-time screening with
colonoscopy (to age 83) or sigmoidoscopy (to age 84) is advised for adults who have never
been screened for colorectal cancer. (See "Screening for colorectal cancer: Strategies in
patients at average risk", section on 'Choosing a screening test' and "Screening for
colorectal cancer: Strategies in patients at average risk".)
●

-- 12 of 81 --

Lung cancer — For patients at increased risk for lung cancer, we suggest annual screening
with low-dose helical computed tomography (CT). Further discussion on the appropriateness
of lung cancer screening, including information on which patients are at increased risk, can
be found elsewhere. (See "Screening for lung cancer", section on 'Synthesizing the available
evidence' and "Screening for lung cancer", section on 'Our approach to counseling for
screening'.)
Prostate cancer — Individual patient preferences for specific health outcomes are deciding
factors in determining whether to screen for prostate cancer. Patients who are potential
candidates for screening should be engaged in discussions or decision-making processes that
inform them and evoke these preferences. (See "Screening for prostate cancer", section on
'Approach to screening'.)
Health care providers should periodically discuss prostate cancer screening with patients who
are expected to live at least 10 years and are old enough to be at significant risk for prostate
cancer. We suggest that discussions begin at age 50 in average-risk individuals. We suggest
discussions begin at age 40 to 45 in those at high risk for prostate cancer (including African
American patients; those with a family history of prostate cancer, particularly in relatives
younger than age 65; and individuals who are known or likely to have the BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations).
Melanoma
The recommended interval varies depending on the screening strategy. Patients should
be advised of the risks and benefits of different screening options. The decision about
which option to select should be made between the patient and clinician, weighing factors
of effectiveness, safety, cost, and availability of the screening tests. (See "Screening for
colorectal cancer: Strategies in patients at average risk".)
Family history of colorectal cancer. (See "Screening for colorectal cancer in patients with a
family history of colorectal cancer or advanced polyp".)
●
Familial adenomatous polyposis. (See "Familial adenomatous polyposis: Screening and
management of patients and families".)
●
Lynch syndrome. (See "Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer): Cancer
screening and management".)
●
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. (See "Juvenile polyposis syndrome".)	●
Inflammatory bowel disease. (See "Surveillance and management of dysplasia in patients
with inflammatory bowel disease".)
●

-- 13 of 81 --

Multicancer detection tests — Multicancer detection (MCD) tests have the goal of detecting
cancer at early stages [44]. MCD tests analyze blood samples for molecular signals (eg,
deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA], proteins) that are produced by cancer cells. Although they are
intended to serve as adjuncts to standard cancer screening tests, MCDs can result in
substantial downstream testing, which can be costly. A positive test result requires additional
imaging and diagnostic work-up, particularly since MCD tests often do not specify the type of
cancer or the organ(s) that are involved.
Although some MCD tests are commercially available and may detect cancer signals across a
wide diversity of malignancies [45], their clinical utility for cancer screening remains uncertain
[46]. Results from studies are generally not reflective of test performance in larger
populations who typically undergo screening (ie, asymptomatic individuals in primary care).
Most importantly, no studies have shown that MCD testing improves clinical outcomes, such
as cancer-related deaths, particularly in comparison with existing screening methodologies
[47,48]. Representative studies include:
We do not routinely screen patients at average risk for melanoma; however, we recommend
that clinicians remain vigilant for any suspicious lesions identified in the course of a routine
or sick visit and make appropriate referrals for further evaluation of all such lesions.
●
We suggest that individuals at high risk of melanoma have a regular full-body skin
examination by a clinician with skin expertise. The optimal frequency of examination is
unknown (see "Screening for melanoma in adults and adolescents", section on 'High-risk
patients'). The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has found insufficient
evidence for or against skin cancer screening [43]. Our rationale for screening high-risk
patients is presented separately. (See "Screening for melanoma in adults and adolescents",
section on 'Rationale for screening'.)
Surveillance of patients in melanoma-prone kindreds is described separately. (See
"Inherited susceptibility to melanoma", section on 'Surveillance in melanoma-prone
kindreds'.)
●
A prospective cohort study (PATHFINDER) performed MCD testing in a convenience sample
of 6621 asymptomatic adults aged 50 years or older, 31 percent of whom had a known
cancer predisposition or prior cancer (a high-risk population). A cancer signal was detected
in 1.4 percent of participants, of whom 38 percent were diagnosed with cancer (true
positives) and 62 percent were not (false positives) [49]. Of the true positives, 17 percent
had recurrence of previous disease. The median time to diagnostic resolution was 57 days
in true positives and longer (162 days) in false positives. Most participants had further
work-up with laboratory tests and imaging, and procedures were done in 30 percent of
participants with false-positive results and 82 percent of those with true-positive results. In
this high-risk study population, the overall sensitivity of MCD testing was only moderate (29
●

-- 14 of 81 --

Given the limitations of MCD tests, no national organization has recommended their use for
cancer screening.
OTHER SCREENING
percent), suggesting that MCD testing would need to occur in conjunction with standard
cancer screening methods to be effective [48].
A multicenter cohort study of 6238 participants in England and Wales evaluated the utility
of an MCD test in adult patients who were referred for urgent investigation of nonspecific
symptoms that were possibly caused by lung, gastrointestinal, or gynecologic cancers [50].
This study population was therefore not typical of an asymptomatic screening population.
In this cohort of symptomatic patients, the test was highly specific (98 percent) but only
moderately sensitive (66 percent). Test sensitivity was lower for early-stage cancers (24
percent for stage I cancers), and only 43 percent of all cancers diagnosed were stages I to
II.
●
Iron deficiency – We do not routinely screen every adult for iron deficiency, but we do
screen those at higher risk (eg, premenopausal women, particularly those with prior
pregnancies or heavy menstrual periods, as well as individuals with conditions that might
cause blood loss or iron malabsorption). (See "Determining the cause of iron deficiency in
adolescents and adults", section on 'Causes (organized by mechanism)'.)
●
The frequency of screening is also individualized; annual screening may be reasonable for
those at the highest risk, such as a menstruating individual with heavy periods. Screening
for iron deficiency is discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Diagnosis of iron deficiency and
iron deficiency anemia in adults", section on 'Screening (asymptomatic individuals)'.)
Screening for iron deficiency in pregnant individuals is discussed elsewhere. (See "Anemia in
pregnancy", section on 'Screening during pregnancy'.)
Hypothyroidism – Although subclinical hypothyroidism is common in the adult population
[51], we do not routinely screen most asymptomatic nonpregnant adults, as there is no
evidence that early detection and treatment with T4 improves clinically important outcomes
in such individuals. However, we do screen individuals who are at increased risk for
hypothyroidism, including those with goiter, history of autoimmune disease, previous
radioactive iodine therapy and/or head and neck irradiation, family history of thyroid
disease, and use of medications that may impair thyroid function. This is discussed in detail
elsewhere. (See "Diagnosis of and screening for hypothyroidism in nonpregnant adults",
section on 'Screening in the absence of signs and/or symptoms of hypothyroidism'.)
●

-- 15 of 81 --

IMMUNIZATION
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) makes annual recommendations for
immunizations in adults ( figure 1 and
figure 2). (See "Standard immunizations for
nonpregnant adults".)
Recommendations for screening pregnant individuals for hypothyroidism are discussed
separately. (See "Hypothyroidism during pregnancy: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and
treatment", section on 'Screening'.)
Vitamin D deficiency – There are few data regarding screening for vitamin D deficiency in
adults, but most experts agree that it is not necessary to perform broad-based screening of
serum 25(OH)D levels in the general population. We do, however, screen those at high risk
of vitamin D deficiency (eg, limited or no sunlight exposure; individuals with obesity,
osteoporosis, or malabsorption). Screening for vitamin D deficiency and vitamin D
replacement therapy in older adults are reviewed in detail elsewhere. (See "Vitamin D
deficiency in adults: Definition, clinical manifestations, and treatment", section on
'Candidates for 25(OH)D measurements' and "Geriatric health maintenance", section on
'Vitamin D'.)
●
Glaucoma – Although there is limited evidence to support screening, in populations with
sufficient resources, we suggest that individuals over age 40 undergo periodic
comprehensive eye evaluations by an eye specialist to evaluate for glaucoma. Earlier
evaluation may be appropriate for individuals with significant risk factors. This is discussed
in detail elsewhere. (See "Open-angle glaucoma: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and
diagnosis", section on 'Screening'.)
●
Influenza vaccine – We recommend annual
influenza vaccination for all adults. (See
"Seasonal influenza vaccination in adults".)
●
Tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis
vaccination (Td/Tdap) – The CDC recommends a
single dose of Tdap in place of Td for all adults
aged 19 years and older who have not received
Tdap previously [52]. Thereafter, all adults should
receive a booster every 10 years with either Tdap
or Td and should receive a Tdap with each pregnancy. (See "Tetanus-diphtheria toxoid
vaccination in adults" and "Immunizations during pregnancy".)
● 	Adult immunization schedule by age
– Recommendations for ages 19
years or older, United States, 2025
Figure 1 - larger image below

-- 16 of 81 --

Varicella vaccine – We recommend routine varicella vaccination for healthy persons >13
years of age without evidence of immunity. (See "Vaccination for the prevention of
chickenpox (primary varicella infection)", section on 'Adolescents and adults'.)
●
Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccines – We recommend routine vaccination with the HPV
vaccine for all individuals through age 26 years. (See "Human papillomavirus vaccination".)
●
Zoster vaccine – We suggest zoster vaccination in most individuals who are 50 years of age
or older. (See "Vaccination for the prevention of shingles (herpes zoster) in adults".)
●
Pneumococcal vaccines – We recommend
pneumococcal vaccination for all adults ≥65
years old, as well as adults 19 and above who
have a condition that increases the risk of
pneumococcal disease or severe complications
from pneumococcal infection ( table 6). We
also suggest pneumococcal vaccination for all
adults between 50 and 64 years of age. (See
"Pneumococcal vaccination in adults".)
●
Meningococcal vaccines – Meningococcal
vaccination is recommended in the United States
based on age and/or risk factors. (See
"Meningococcal vaccination in children and
adults", section on 'Indications and schedules in
the United States'.)
●
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccination – HBV vaccination is recommended for all adults <60
years of age, as well as for those ≥60 who are seeking protection against HBV or are at
increased risk for acquiring HBV infection ( table 7). (See "Hepatitis B virus immunization
in adults", section on 'Approach to vaccination'.)
●
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) – We recommend that all adults receive at least one
dose of an updated (2024 to 2025 formula) COVID-19 vaccine. Immunocompetent
individuals ≥65 years of age should receive a second 2024 to 2025 formula COVID-19 dose
approximately six months after the first. Recommendations for individuals with
immunocompromising conditions ( table 8) vary depending on their vaccination history.
(See "COVID-19: Vaccines", section on 'Approach to vaccination in the United States'.)
●
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) – Several RSV vaccines are available. Recommendations
on the use of these vaccines in older adults have been put forth by the CDC [53]. Vaccine
formulations and the use of RSV vaccines in adults and pregnant persons are discussed
●
Indications for pneumococcal
vaccination in adults in the United
States
Table 6 - larger image below

-- 17 of 81 --

Additional immunizations may be necessary for patients in particular risk groups (eg, health
care workers, asplenia, individuals with cancer), and there are considerations for appropriate
vaccinations during pregnancy. Please see the appropriate topics for details. (See
"Immunizations for health care providers" and "Immunizations in adults with cancer" and
"Prevention of infection in patients with impaired splenic function", section on 'Vaccinations'
and "Immunizations during pregnancy".)
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED AND BLOODBORNE INFECTIONS
Prevention and screening for sexually transmitted infections in asymptomatic patients and
pregnant individuals are discussed in detail elsewhere. (See "Prevention of sexually
transmitted infections" and "Screening for sexually transmitted infections" and "Prenatal care:
Initial assessment", section on 'Infection'.)
Additional screening may be necessary for patients in particular risk groups (eg, commercial
sex workers ( table 9), men who have sex with men ( table 10), persons in correctional
facilities, persons diagnosed with another sexually transmitted infection). (See "Screening for
sexually transmitted infections".)
elsewhere. (See "Respiratory syncytial virus infection in adults" and "Immunizations during
pregnancy", section on 'Respiratory syncytial virus'.)
Chlamydia – We suggest chlamydia screening for all sexually active women <25 years and
sexually active women ≥25 years with risk factors (eg, history of prior chlamydial or other
sexually transmitted infection, new or multiple sex partners, sex partner with concurrent
partners, sex partner with a sexually transmitted infection, exchanging sex for drugs or
money). (See "Screening for sexually transmitted infections", section on 'Female patients'.)
●
We also suggest screening men in high-risk populations (men attending clinics for sexually
transmitted infections, men who have sex with men, or men in correctional facilities). (See
"Screening for sexually transmitted infections", section on 'Male patients'.)
Gonorrhea – Routine screening should be offered to sexually active patients at high risk of
infection, including (see "Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infection in adults and adolescents", section on 'Testing asymptomatic individuals'):
●
HIV-infected persons	•
Sexually active women <25 years old	•
Individuals with new or many sexual partners	•
Men who have sex with men	•
Sexually active individuals living in areas of high Neisseria gonorrhoeae prevalence	•
Individuals with a history of other sexually transmitted infection(s)	•

-- 18 of 81 --

PSYCHOSOCIAL HEALTH CONCERNS
Depression — We suggest screening adolescents and adults (ages 12 and older) for
depression, including older adults. Screening is most effective when personnel or systems are
in place to ensure appropriate follow-up and management for those who screen positive. (See
"Screening for depression in adults", section on 'Who to screen' and "Screening for depression
in adults", section on 'Practice support'.)
We suggest using a two-question screen or the Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2)
because of ease of administration and reasonable sensitivity ( table 12). A positive screen
should be followed by a thorough clinical assessment, facilitated with the PHQ-9 ( table 13)
Women ≤35 years old and men ≤30 years old entering correctional facilities, at intake	•
Hepatitis B – In general, we suggest one-time
universal screening for hepatitis B virus (HBV) for
adults >18 years of age. Unvaccinated persons at
increased risk may need repeated screening
( table 11). More detailed information on
hepatitis B screening is presented separately.
(See "Hepatitis B virus: Screening and diagnosis
in adults", section on 'Approach to screening and
testing'.)
●
Hepatitis C – We recommend a one-time
screening for all United States adults ages
between 18 to 79 years. Rescreening is
appropriate for those with risk factors that may
result in continued exposure to hepatitis C; this is
reviewed elsewhere. (See "Screening and diagnosis of chronic hepatitis C virus infection"
and "Screening and diagnosis of chronic hepatitis C virus infection", section on 'Those with
ongoing risk'.)
●
HIV infection – We recommend screening adults for HIV infection until age 75. (See
"Screening and diagnostic testing for HIV infection in adults".)
●
Syphilis – We recommend screening for syphilis in patients considered high risk. These
include men who have sex with men, individuals in prison, persons with multiple sexual
partners, patients with another sexually transmitted infection, and sexually active HIV-
infected patients. (See "Syphilis: Screening and diagnostic testing", section on 'Whom to
test'.)
●
Groups at increased risk for hepatitis
B virus infection
Table 11 - larger image below

-- 19 of 81 --

or a similar instrument, to diagnose depression. (See "Screening for depression in adults",
section on 'Two-step approach to screening'.)
Limited evidence guides the optimal frequency of screening for depression. To facilitate ease
of implementation, we support screening at the time of a routine health visit. (See "Screening
for depression in adults", section on 'Practical implementation, follow-up, and practice
support'.)
Anxiety — We suggest screening adolescents and adults ages 13 to 64 for anxiety disorders.
Screening should use a validated instrument, such as the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7
(GAD-7) scale. Although the benefits and harms of screening adults ages 65 and older are
likely similar to those for younger individuals, insufficient evidence exists to support
screening in this population. Because few data exist to clarify the optimal timing or frequency
of screening, we support screening during a routine health visit. (See "Generalized anxiety
disorder in adults: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, course, assessment,
and diagnosis", section on 'Screening'.)
Substance use-related problems
Intimate partner violence — Given the high prevalence of intimate partner violence and the
lack of harm and potential benefits of screening, we suggest routine screening for all patients
on all visits to primary care clinicians, obstetrician-gynecologists, and emergency
departments, as well as on hospital admission. (See "Intimate partner violence: Diagnosis and
screening".)
OSTEOPOROSIS
Alcohol – We recommend that all adult primary care patients be screened for unhealthy
alcohol use. In general, annual screening is suggested. We suggest the single-item alcohol
screening question for most primary care practices. Single-item screen starts with the
question, "Do you sometimes drink beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages?" If yes, then
the clinician can follow up with, "How many times in the past year have you had five (four
for women) or more drinks in a day?"
●
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test – Consumption (AUDIT-C) ( table 14) is an
alternative for offices with more resources (eg, staff, time, ability to automate
administration and scoring). (See "Screening for unhealthy use of alcohol and other drugs
in primary care".)
Other drug use – We also suggest screening patients for unhealthy use of drugs, including
illegal drugs and prescription medications that are not used for medical purposes [54]. (See
"Screening for unhealthy use of alcohol and other drugs in primary care".)
●

-- 20 of 81 --

We suggest osteoporosis screening in the following groups (see "Screening for osteoporosis
in men aged ≥50 years and postmenopausal women" and "Fracture risk assessment"):
There are several modalities to evaluate bone
density. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) is
most commonly used. (See "Overview of dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry".)
VASCULAR DISEASE
INFORMATION FOR PATIENTS
UpToDate offers two types of patient education materials, "The Basics" and "Beyond the
Basics." The Basics patient education pieces are written in plain language, at the 5 to 6
Postmenopausal women <65 years with risk
factors for osteoporosis ( table 15).
●
Men with clinical manifestation of low bone
mass, history of low-trauma fracture, risk factors
for fracture (such as androgen deprivation
therapy for prostate cancer, hypogonadism,
primary hyperparathyroidism, or intestinal
disorders).
●
All women ≥65 years. (See "Geriatric health
maintenance", section on 'Osteoporosis'.)
●
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) – Screening for AAA is not recommended for adults <65
years. (See "Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm".)
●
We recommend one-time ultrasound screening for AAA in men ages 65 to 75 years who
are current or former smokers.
•
We also suggest one-time ultrasound screening for AAA in men ages 65 to 75 who have
never smoked but who have a first-degree relative who required repair of an AAA or died
from a ruptured AAA.
•
Carotid artery stenosis – We do not recommend screening (either by auscultation for
carotid bruit or by carotid ultrasound) asymptomatic patients for carotid artery stenosis.
(See "Screening for asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis".)
●
Peripheral artery disease – We do not suggest screening for peripheral artery disease.
(See "Asymptomatic peripheral artery disease".)
●
th 	th
Clinical risk factors for fracture
Table 15 - larger image below

-- 21 of 81 --

grade reading level, and they answer the four or five key questions a patient might have
about a given condition. These articles are best for patients who want a general overview and
who prefer short, easy-to-read materials. Beyond the Basics patient education pieces are
longer, more sophisticated, and more detailed. These articles are written at the 10 to 12
grade reading level and are best for patients who want in-depth information and are
comfortable with some medical jargon.
Here are the patient education articles that are relevant to this topic. We encourage you to
print or email these topics to your patients. (You can also locate patient education articles on
a variety of subjects by searching on "patient info" and the keyword(s) of interest.)
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
th 	th
Basics topics (see "Patient education: Routine physical for adults (The Basics)" and "Patient
education: Preventive health care for ages 18 to 39 (The Basics)" and "Patient education:
Preventive health care for ages 40 to 64 (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Lowering your
risk of heart disease (The Basics)" and "Patient education: Cancer screening (The Basics)"
and "Patient education: Vaccines for adults (The Basics)")
●
Prioritizing preventive care – Appropriate screening and prevention interventions need to
be prioritized both for effectiveness in modifying target outcomes and for risk of the
condition in the individual patient. (See 'Prioritizing preventive services' above.)
●
Periodic health maintenance visits – We suggest periodic health maintenance visits every
three years for adult patients ≤49 years without chronic conditions and annually for adults
≥50 years. Preventive counseling and services are important components of the periodic
health check-up. (See 'Periodic "check-up"' above.)
●
Challenges of delivering screening and counseling interventions – Patients may not
receive appropriate screening and prevention interventions if the time for addressing these
needs is limited to a "routine physical examination." Creative solutions for delivering
preventive care include involving use of patient databases and mechanisms for patient
outreach, as well as incorporating preventive care into patient sick visits. (See 'Supportive
office systems' above.)
●
Important targets for disease prevention	●
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) – Key features of CVD prevention include risk assessment
and treatment of predisposing conditions. (See 'Cardiovascular disease prevention'
above.)
•
Cancer – Cancer prevention includes counseling to reduce risk factors, most notably
smoking, and appropriate screening. (See 'General cancer prevention counseling' above
•

-- 22 of 81 --

Use of UpToDate is subject to the Terms of Use.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Ten great public health achievements--
United States, 2001-2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2011; 60:619.
2. Saini SD, van Hees F, Vijan S. Smarter screening for cancer: possibilities and challenges of
personalization. JAMA 2014; 312:2211.
3. Harris RP, Wilt TJ, Qaseem A, High Value Care Task Force of the American College of
Physicians. A value framework for cancer screening: advice for high-value care from the
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2015; 162:712.
4. Taksler GB, Keshner M, Fagerlin A, et al. Personalized estimates of benefit from
preventive care guidelines: a proof of concept. Ann Intern Med 2013; 159:161.
5. Maciosek MV, Coffield AB, Edwards NM, et al. Priorities among effective clinical
preventive services: results of a systematic review and analysis. Am J Prev Med 2006;
31:52.
6. Lipitz-Snyderman A, Bach PB. Overuse of health care services: when less is more … more
or less. JAMA Intern Med 2013; 173:1277.
7. Zipkin DA, Umscheid CA, Keating NL, et al. Evidence-based risk communication: a
systematic review. Ann Intern Med 2014; 161:270.
8. Hoffmann TC, Del Mar C. Patients' expectations of the benefits and harms of treatments,
screening, and tests: a systematic review. JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:274.
9. Mazzone PJ, Gould MK, Arenberg DA, et al. Management of Lung Nodules and Lung
Cancer Screening During the COVID-19 Pandemic: CHEST Expert Panel Report. Chest
2020; 158:406.
and 'Cancer screening' above.)
Sexually transmitted and bloodborne infections – Screening for sexually transmitted
infections and bloodborne infections is based on age and patient risk. (See 'Sexually
transmitted and bloodborne infections' above.)
•
Psychologic health conditions – Adults should receive screening for psychologic
conditions such as depression, anxiety, and substance use and referrals for treatment if
indicated. (See 'Psychosocial health concerns' above.)
•
Immunization – Immunization is an effective method of disease prevention. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) makes annual recommendations for
immunizations in adults ( figure 1 and figure 2). (See 'Immunization' above.)
●

-- 23 of 81 --

10. USPSTF recommendations for primary care practice https://www.uspreventiveservicestas
kforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations (Accessed on January 19, 2018).
11. USPSTF Grade definitions https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/gr
ade-definitions.
12. Woolf SH, Harris R. The harms of screening: new attention to an old concern. JAMA 2012;
307:565.
13. Welch HG, Black WC. Overdiagnosis in cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010; 102:605.
14. Bouck Z, Calzavara AJ, Ivers NM, et al. Association of Low-Value Testing With Subsequent
Health Care Use and Clinical Outcomes Among Low-risk Primary Care Outpatients
Undergoing an Annual Health Examination. JAMA Intern Med 2020; 180:973.
15. Lansdorp-Vogelaar I, Gulati R, Mariotto AB, et al. Personalizing age of cancer screening
cessation based on comorbid conditions: model estimates of harms and benefits. Ann
Intern Med 2014; 161:104.
16. Gross CP. Cancer screening in older persons: a new age of wonder. JAMA Intern Med
2014; 174:1565.
17. Royce TJ, Hendrix LH, Stokes WA, et al. Cancer screening rates in individuals with different
life expectancies. JAMA Intern Med 2014; 174:1558.
18. Himmelstein DU, Phillips RS. Should We Abandon Routine Visits? There Is Little Evidence
for or Against. Ann Intern Med 2016; 164:498.
19. Ponka D. The periodic health examination in adults. CMAJ 2014; 186:1245.
20. Ruffin MT, Gorenflo DW, Woodman B. Predictors of screening for breast, cervical,
colorectal, and prostatic cancer among community-based primary care practices. J Am
Board Fam Pract 2000; 13:1.
21. Boulware LE, Marinopoulos S, Phillips KA, et al. Systematic review: the value of the
periodic health evaluation. Ann Intern Med 2007; 146:289.
22. Fenton JJ, Cai Y, Weiss NS, et al. Delivery of cancer screening: how important is the
preventive health examination? Arch Intern Med 2007; 167:580.
23. Atlas SJ, Grant RW, Ferris TG, et al. Patient-physician connectedness and quality of
primary care. Ann Intern Med 2009; 150:325.
24. Ferrante JM, Lee JH, McCarthy EP, et al. Primary care utilization and colorectal cancer
incidence and mortality among Medicare beneficiaries: a population-based, case-control
study. Ann Intern Med 2013; 159:437.
25. Fisher KJ, Lee JH, Ferrante JM, et al. The effects of primary care on breast cancer mortality
and incidence among Medicare beneficiaries. Cancer 2013; 119:2964.
26. Laine C. The annual physical examination: needless ritual or necessary routine? Ann
Intern Med 2002; 136:701.

-- 24 of 81 --

27. Si S, Moss JR, Sullivan TR, et al. Effectiveness of general practice-based health checks: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Gen Pract 2014; 64:e47.
28. Krogsbøll LT, Jørgensen KJ, Grønhøj Larsen C, Gøtzsche PC. General health checks in
adults for reducing morbidity and mortality from disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2012; 10:CD009009.
29. Torke AM, Schwartz PH, Holtz LR, et al. Older adults and forgoing cancer screening: "I
think it would be strange". JAMA Intern Med 2013; 173:526.
30. Lee SJ, Boscardin WJ, Stijacic-Cenzer I, et al. Time lag to benefit after screening for breast
and colorectal cancer: meta-analysis of survival data from the United States, Sweden,
United Kingdom, and Denmark. BMJ 2013; 346:e8441.
31. Stone EG, Morton SC, Hulscher ME, et al. Interventions that increase use of adult
immunization and cancer screening services: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 2002;
136:641.
32. Szilagyi P, Vann J, Bordley C, et al. Interventions aimed at improving immunization rates.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002; :CD003941.
33. Sequist TD, Zaslavsky AM, Marshall R, et al. Patient and physician reminders to promote
colorectal cancer screening: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Intern Med 2009;
169:364.
34. Ghorob A, Bodenheimer T. Sharing the care to improve access to primary care. N Engl J
Med 2012; 366:1955.
35. US Preventive Services Task Force, Krist AH, Davidson KW, et al. Screening for
Hypertension in Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Reaffirmation
Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2021; 325:1650.
36. Guirguis-Blake JM, Evans CV, Webber EM, et al. Screening for Hypertension in Adults:
Updated Evidence Report and Systematic Review for the US Preventive Services Task
Force. JAMA 2021; 325:1657.
37. Screening for high blood pressure in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2015; 163:I.
38. Jones DW, Ferdinand KC, Taler SJ, et al. 2025
AHA/ACC/AANP/AAPA/ABC/ACCP/ACPM/AGS/AMA/ASPC/NMA/PCNA/SGIM Guideline for
the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in
Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2025; 86:1567.
39. Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health and Risk Reduction in
Children and Adolescents, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Expert panel on
integrated guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in children and
adolescents: summary report. Pediatrics 2011; 128 Suppl 5:S213.

-- 25 of 81 --

40. Yoon PW, Bastian B, Anderson RN, et al. Potentially preventable deaths from the five
leading causes of death--United States, 2008-2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;
63:369.
41. US Preventive Services Task Force, Davidson KW, Barry MJ, et al. Screening for
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation
Statement. JAMA 2021; 326:736.
42. US Preventive Services Task Force, Krist AH, Davidson KW, et al. Interventions for Tobacco
Smoking Cessation in Adults, Including Pregnant Persons: US Preventive Services Task
Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2021; 325:265.
43. US Preventive Services Task Force, Mangione CM, Barry MJ, et al. Screening for Skin
Cancer: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2023;
329:1290.
44. Hackshaw A, Cohen SS, Reichert H, et al. Estimating the population health impact of a
multi-cancer early detection genomic blood test to complement existing screening in the
US and UK. Br J Cancer 2021; 125:1432.
45. Klein EA, Richards D, Cohn A, et al. Clinical validation of a targeted methylation-based
multi-cancer early detection test using an independent validation set. Ann Oncol 2021;
32:1167.
46. Robbins HA. Multicancer Early Detection Tests - Keeping a High Bar for Evidence of
Benefit. N Engl J Med 2024; 391:292.
47. Tie J. Triaging suspected cancer with a multi-cancer early detection blood test. Lancet
Oncol 2023; 24:710.
48. Lee R, Robbins HA. PATHFINDER: another step on the uncharted path to multicancer
screening. Lancet 2023; 402:1213.
49. Schrag D, Beer TM, McDonnell CH 3rd, et al. Blood-based tests for multicancer early
detection (PATHFINDER): a prospective cohort study. Lancet 2023; 402:1251.
50. Nicholson BD, Oke J, Virdee PS, et al. Multi-cancer early detection test in symptomatic
patients referred for cancer investigation in England and Wales (SYMPLIFY): a large-scale,
observational cohort study. Lancet Oncol 2023; 24:733.
51. Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, et al. Serum TSH, T(4), and thyroid antibodies in
the United States population (1988 to 1994): National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES III). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002; 87:489.
52. Liang JL, Tiwari T, Moro P, et al. Prevention of Pertussis, Tetanus, and Diphtheria with
Vaccines in the United States: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2018; 67:1.
53. Melgar M, Britton A, Roper LE, et al. Use of Respiratory Syncytial Virus Vaccines in Older
Adults: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United

-- 26 of 81 --

States, 2023. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2023; 72:793.
54. US Preventive Services Task Force, Krist AH, Davidson KW, et al. Screening for Unhealthy
Drug Use: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2020;
323:2301.
Topic 97819 Version 76.0

-- 27 of 81 --

GRAPHICS
Table 1: Definition of hypertension based on blood pressure measurement
strategy
SBP/DBP 	Clinic 	SMBP 	Daytime
ABPM
Nighttime
ABPM
24-hour
ABPM
ACC/AHA
guidelines
2025
≥130/80 	≥130/80 	≥130/80 	≥110/65 	≥125/75
ESC guidelines
2024
≥140/90 	≥135/85 	≥135/85 	≥120/70 	≥130/80
ABPM: ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; ACC/AHA: American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association; DBP: diastolic blood pressure; ESC: European Society of Cardiology; SBP: systolic
blood pressure; SMBP: self-measured blood pressure.
References:
1. Jones DW, Ferdinand KC, Taler SJ, et al. AHA/ACC/AANP/AAPA/ABC/ACCP/ACPM/AGS/AMA/ASPC/NMA/PCNA/SGIM guideline
for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: A report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2025.
2. McEvoy JW, McCarthy CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of elevated blood pressure and
hypertension. Eur Heart J 2024; ehae178.
Graphic 119219 Version 6.0
[1]
[2]

-- 28 of 81 --

Table 2: Factors associated with increased risk of diabetes
Overweight or obesity (BMI ≥25 kg/m or ≥23 kg/m in Asian Americans)
Gestational diabetes
First-degree relative with diabetes
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Hypertension (≥130/80 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)
High-risk race/ethnicity (eg, African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, Pacific
Islander)
Established cardiovascular disease (eg, MI, heart failure)
HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (<0.90 mmol/L) and/or a triglyceride level >250 mg/dL (>2.82
mmol/L)
Metabolic syndrome
Physical inactivity
Other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (eg, acanthosis nigricans)
HIV disease
Exposure to high-risk medications (eg, glucocorticoids, second-generation antipsychotics, HIV
antiretrovirals, immune checkpoint inhibitors, thiazide diuretics, high-potency statins)
History of pancreatitis
BMI: body mass index; HDL: high-density lipoprotein; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MI:
myocardial infarction.
References:
1. American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes: Standards of
care in diabetes—2024. Diabetes Care 2024; 47:S20.
2. Crawford AL, Laiteerapong N. Type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Intern Med 2024; 177:ITC81.
Graphic 146191 Version 1.0
2 	2

-- 29 of 81 --

Table 3: Risk and protective factors for developing breast cancer
Risk group
Low risk 	High risk Relative
risk
Risk factors
Deleterious BRCA1/BRCA2 genes 	Negative 	Positive 	3.0 to 7.0
Mother or sister with breast cancer 	No 	Yes 	2.6
Age 	30 to 34 	70 to 74 	18.0
Age at menarche 	>14 	<12 	1.5
Age at first birth 	<20 	>30 	1.9 to 3.5
Age at menopause 	<45 	>55 	2.0
Use of contraceptive pills 	Never 	Past/current
use
1.07 to 1.2
Hormone replacement therapy (estrogen
+ progestin)
Never 	Current 	1.2
Alcohol 	None 	2 to
5 drinks/day
1.4
Breast density on mammography
(percents)
0 	≥75 	1.8 to 6.0
Bone density 	Lowest quartile 	Highest
quartile
2.7 to 3.5
History of a benign breast biopsy 	No 	Yes 	1.7
History of atypical hyperplasia on biopsy 	No 	Yes 	3.7
Protective factors
Breast feeding (months) 	≥16 	0 	0.73
Parity 	≥5 	0 	0.71
Recreational exercise 	Yes 	No 	0.70
Postmenopause body mass index (kg/m ) <22.9 	>30.7 	0.63
Oophorectomy before age 35 years 	Yes 	No 	0.3
Aspirin 	≥Once/week for ≥6
months
Nonusers 	0.79
Adapted from: Clemons M, Goss P. Estrogen and the risk of breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2001; 344:276.
Graphic 64508 Version 4.0
2

-- 30 of 81 --

Table 4: Risk assessment criteria for inherited breast-ovarian cancer syndome,
combining several guidelines
Non-Jewish families
Any of the following:
1 case of breast cancer ≤40 years old in a first- or second-degree relative
1 first- or second-degree relative with breast and ovarian cancer, at any age
2 or more cases of breast cancer in first- or second-degree relatives if one is diagnosed at ≤50 years
old or is bilateral cancer
1 first- or second-degree relative with breast cancer at ≤50 years old, or bilateral breast cancer, and 1
first- or second-degree relative with ovarian cancer
3 cases of breast and ovarian cancer (at least 1 case of ovarian cancer) in first- or second-degree
relatives
2 cases of ovarian cancer in first- or second-degree relatives
1 case of male breast cancer in a first- or second-degree relative if another first- or second-degree
relative has (male or female) breast or ovarian cancer
Jewish families
Any of the following:
1 or more cases of breast cancer ≤50 years old in a first- or second-degree relative
1 or more cases of ovarian cancer at any age in a first- or second-degree relative
1 or more first- or second-degree relatives with breast cancer at any age, if another first- or second-
degree relative has breast and/or ovarian cancer at any age
1 or more cases of male breast cancer in a first- or second-degree relative
Adapted from: Hampel H, Sweet K, Westman JA, et al. Referral for cancer genetics consultation: a review and compilation of risk
assessment criteria. J Med Genet 2004; 41:81.
Graphic 65717 Version 7.0

-- 31 of 81 --

Table 5: Society and expert recommendations for routine mammographic
screening in women at average risk
Group (date)
Frequency
of
screening
(years)
Initiation of screening for women at
average risk
40 to 49
years of
age
50 to 69
years of
age
≥70 years
of age
Government-sponsored groups
United States Preventive Services
Task Force (2024)
2 	Yes, start age
40
Yes 	Yes, to age
74
Canadian Task Force on Preventive
Health Care (2018)
2 to 3 	Recommend
against
Yes 	Yes, to age
74
National Health Service, United
Kingdom (2018)
3 	No 	Yes 	Yes, to age
71
Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners (2018)
2 	No 	Yes 	Yes, to age
74
Medical societies
American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017)
1 to 2 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes, to at
least age
75
American College of Physicians
(2025)
2 	Individualize Yes 	Yes, to age
74
American Cancer Society (2015) 	1 year age 45
to 54
Individualize
through age
44
Yes, start age
45
Yes 	Yes
1 to 2 years
age ≥55
American College of Radiology and
Society of Breast Imaging (2021)
1 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes
Coalitions
National Comprehensive Cancer
Network (2018)
1 	Yes 	Yes 	Yes
* Women should be counseled about the harms and benefits of mammography; individualized
decisions should include shared decision-making based on risks, benefits, patient values, and
preferences.
¶ Decision to discontinue screening mammography should be based on a shared decision-making
process informed by the woman's health status and longevity.
Δ If in good health and life expectancy >10 years.
[1]
[2] 	*
[3]
[4]
[5]
*
¶
[6]
*
¶
[7] 	* 	Δ
[8]
◊
[9]

-- 32 of 81 --

◊ Individualize to current health and life expectancy; if a woman is in reasonably good health and
would be a candidate for treatment, then should continue screening.
References:
1. Final recommendation statement: Breast cancer: Screening. US Preventive Services Task Force.
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/breast-cancer-screening#bcei-recommendation-
title-area (Accessed on July 15, 2026).
2. Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care, Klarenbach S, Sims-Jones N, Lewin G, et al. Recommendations on
screening for breast cancer in women aged 40-74 years who are not at increased risk for breast cancer. CMAJ 2018;
190:E1441.
3. National Health Service. When it's offered: Breast cancer screening. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/breast-cancer-
screening/when-its-offered/ (Accessed on July 15, 2026).
4. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners. Guidelines for preventive activities in general practice, 9th ed, East
Melbourne, RACGP 2018.
5. Committee on Practice Bulletins—Gynecology. Practice bulletin no. 179: Breast cancer risk assessment and screening in
average-risk women. Obstet Gynecol 2017; 130:e1-16.
6. Qaseem A, Harrod CS, Balk EML, et al. Screening for breast cancer in asymptomatic, average-risk adult females: A
guidance statement from the American College of Physicians (version 2). Ann Intern Med 2026; 179:842.
7. Oeffinger KC, Fontham ETH, Etzioni R, et al. Breast cancer screening for women at average risk: 2015 guideline update
from the American Cancer Society. JAMA 2015; 314:1599.
8. Monticciolo DL, Malak SF, Friedewald SM, et al. Breast cancer screening recommendations inclusive of all women at
average risk: Update from the ACR and Society of Breast Imaging. J Am Coll Radiol 2021; 18:1280.
9. NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology: Breast cancer, version 2. National Comprehensive Cancer Network 2018.
Graphic 53551 Version 34.0

-- 33 of 81 --

Figure 1: Adult immunization schedule by age – Recommendations for ages 19
years or older, United States, 2025

-- 34 of 81 --

Administer recommended vaccines if vaccination history is incomplete or unknown. Do not restart or
add doses to vaccine series if there are extended intervals between doses. The use of trade names is
for identification purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the ACIP or CDC.
NOTES
For vaccine recommendations for persons 18 years of age or younger, refer to the Recommended
Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule.
Additional information
For calculating intervals between doses, 4 weeks = 28 days. Intervals of ≥4 months are
determined by calendar months.
Within a number range (eg, 12-18), a dash (–) should be read as "through."
Vaccine doses administered ≤4 days before the minimum age or interval are considered valid.
Doses of any vaccine administered ≥5 days earlier than the minimum age or minimum interval
should not be counted as valid and should be repeated. The repeat dose should be spaced after
the invalid dose by the recommended minimum interval. For further details, refer to Table 3-2,
Recommended and minimum ages and intervals between vaccine doses, in Timing and Spacing
of Immunobiologics.
Information on travel vaccination requirements and recommendations is available at
cdc.gov/travel/.
For vaccination of persons with immunodeficiencies, refer to Table 8-1, Vaccination of persons
with primary and secondary immunodeficiencies, in Altered Immunocompetence.
For information about vaccination in the setting of a vaccine-preventable disease outbreak,
contact your state or local health department.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a no-fault alternative to the
traditional legal system for resolving vaccine injury claims. All vaccines included in the adult
immunization schedule except PPSV23, RSV, RZV, mpox, and COVID-19 vaccines are covered by
the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP). Mpox and COVID-19 vaccines are
covered by the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program (CICP). For more information,
refer to www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation or www.hrsa.gov/cicp.
* COVID-19 vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 19-64 years.
Unvaccinated:
1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech.
2 doses 2024-25 Novavax at 0, 3-8 weeks.
Previously vaccinated before 2024-25 vaccine with:
1 or more doses Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax
or Pfizer-BioNTech at least 8 weeks after the most recent dose.
1 dose Novavax: 1 dose 2024-25 Novavax 3-8 weeks after most recent dose. If more
than 8 weeks after the most recent dose, administer 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or
Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech.
2 or more doses Novavax: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech at
least 8 weeks after the most recent dose.
1 or more doses Janssen: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech.
Age 65 years and older.
Unvaccinated: Follow recommendations above for unvaccinated persons ages 19-64
years and administer dose 2 of 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months
later (minimum interval 2 months).

-- 35 of 81 --

Previously vaccinated before 2024-25 vaccine: Follow recommendations above for
previously vaccinated persons ages 19-64 years and administer dose 2 of 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months).
Special situations:
Persons who are moderately or severely immunocompromised. Use vaccine from the
same manufacturer for all doses in the initial vaccination series.
Unvaccinated:
4 doses (3-dose initial series 2024-25 Moderna at 0, 4 weeks, and at least 4 weeks after
dose 2, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months
later [minimum interval 2 months]). May administer additional doses.
4 doses (3-dose initial series 2024-25 Pfizer-BioNTech at 0, 3 weeks, and at least 4
weeks after dose 2, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-
BioNTech 6 months later [minimum interval 2 months]). May administer additional
doses.
3 doses (2-dose initial series 2024-25 Novavax at 0, 3 weeks, followed by 1 dose
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later [minimum interval 2 months]).
May administer additional doses.
Incomplete initial vaccination series before 2024-25 vaccine:
Previous vaccination with Moderna
1 dose Moderna: Complete initial series with 2 doses 2024-25 Moderna at least 4
weeks apart (administer dose 1 4 weeks after most recent dose), followed by 1
dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum
interval 2 months). May administer additional doses.
2 doses Moderna: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna at least 4
weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or
Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer
additional doses.
Previous vaccination with Pfizer-BioNTech
1 dose Pfizer-BioNTech: Complete initial series with 2 doses 2024-25 Pfizer-
BioNTech at least 4 weeks apart (administer dose 1 3 weeks after most recent
dose), followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6
months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer additional doses.
2 doses Pfizer-BioNTech: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Pfizer-
BioNTech at least 4 weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2
months). May administer additional doses.
Previous vaccination with Novavax
1 dose Novavax: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Novavax at least 3
weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or
Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer
additional doses.
Completed the initial vaccination series before 2024-25 vaccine with:
3 or more doses Moderna or 3 or more doses Pfizer-BioNTech: 2 doses 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months apart (minimum interval 2 months).
Administer dose 1 at least 8 weeks after the most recent dose. May administer
additional doses.
2 or more doses Novavax: 2 doses 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6
months apart (minimum interval 2 months). Administer dose 1 at least 8 weeks after
the most recent dose. May administer additional doses.
††
††
††
††
††
††
††
††
††
††

-- 36 of 81 --

†† Additional doses of 2024-25 COVID-19 vaccine for moderately or severely
immunocompromised:
Based on shared clinical decision-making and administered at least 2 months after the
most recent dose (refer to Table 2 at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-
considerations/interim-considerations-us.html#table-02). For description of moderate
and severe immunocompromising conditions and treatment, refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/interim-considerations-
us.html#immunocompromising-conditions-treatment.
Unvaccinated persons have never received any COVID-19 vaccine doses. There is no
preferential recommendation for the use of one COVID-19 vaccine over another when
more than one recommended age-appropriate vaccine is available. Administer an age-
appropriate COVID-19 vaccine product for each dose.
For more information about the interchangeability of COVID-19 vaccines, refer to
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/interim-considerations-
us.html#Interchangeability.
Current COVID-19 schedule and dose formulation available at
www.cdc.gov/covidschedule.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to COVID-19 vaccination, refer to COVID-19 Appendix.
¶ Influenza vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 19 years or older: 1 dose any influenza vaccine appropriate for age and health status
annually.
Solid organ transplant recipients aged 19 through 64 years receiving
immunosuppressive medications: HD-IIV3 and aIIV3 are acceptable options. No
preference over other age-appropriate IIV3 or RIV3.
Age 65 years or older: Any one of HD-IIV3, RIV3, or aIIV3 is preferred. If none of these
three vaccines are available, then any other age-appropriate influenza vaccine should be
used.
For the 2024-25 season, refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/rr/rr7305a1.htm.
For the 2025-26 season, refer to the 2025-26 ACIP influenza vaccine recommendations.
Special situations:
Close contacts (eg, caregivers, health care workers) of severely immunosuppressed
persons who require a protected environment: Should not receive LAIV3. If LAIV3 is given,
they should avoid contact with/caring for such immunosuppressed persons for 7 days after
vaccination.
NOTE: Persons with an egg allergy can receive any influenza vaccine (egg-based and non-egg-
based) appropriate for age and health status.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to influenza vaccination, refer to IIV3 Appendix, LAIV3
Appendix, ccIIV3 Appendix, and RIV3 Appendix.
Δ Respiratory syncytial virus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Pregnant persons of any age.
Pregnant at 32 weeks 0 days through 36 weeks and 6 days gestation from September
through January in most of the continental United States (NOTE: Providers in
jurisdictions with RSV seasonality that differs from most of the continental United States
[eg, Alaska, jurisdiction with tropical climate] should follow guidance from public health
authorities on timing of administration. Refer to the 2025 Child and Adolescent

-- 37 of 81 --

Immunization Schedule for considerations regarding nirsevimab administration to
infants): 1 dose Abrysvo. Administer RSV vaccine regardless of previous RSV infection.
Either maternal RSV vaccination with Abrysvo or infant immunization with nirsevimab (RSV
monoclonal antibody) is recommended to prevent severe respiratory syncytial virus
disease in infants.
All other pregnant persons: RSV vaccine not recommended.
Subsequent pregnancies: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed in subsequent pregnancies. Infants born to
pregnant persons who received RSV vaccine during a previous pregnancy should receive
nirsevimab.
Age 75 years or older.
Unvaccinated: 1 dose (Arexvy or Abrysvo or mResvia). Additional doses not
recommended.
Previously vaccinated: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed.
Special situations:
Age 60-74 years.
Unvaccinated and at increased risk of severe RSV disease : 1 dose (Arexvy or
Abrysvo or mResvia). Additional doses not recommended.
Previously vaccinated: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed.
Persons 60 years and older can get RSV vaccine at any time but best to administer in late
summer and early fall before RSV spreads in communities—ideally August through October in
most of continental United States. For further guidance, refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/wr/mm7332e1.htm.
*** People can self-attest to the presence of a risk factor. The following medical and
other conditions increase the risk of severe RSV disease:
Chronic cardiovascular disease (eg, heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart
disease). Excludes isolated hypertension.
Chronic lung or respiratory disease (eg, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
emphysema, asthma, interstitial lung disease, cystic fibrosis).
End-stage kidney disease, dependence on hemodialysis, or other kidney replacement
therapy.
Diabetes mellitus complicated by chronic kidney disease, neuropathy, retinopathy, or
other end-organ damage.
Diabetes mellitus requiring treatment with insulin or sodium-glucose cotransporter 2
(SGLT2) inhibitor.
Neurologic or neuromuscular conditions causing impaired airway clearance or respiratory
muscle weakness (eg, post-stroke dysphagia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscular
dystrophy). Excludes history of stroke without impaired airway clearance.
Chronic liver disease (eg, cirrhosis).
Chronic hematologic conditions (eg, sickle cell disease, thalassemia).
Severe obesity (body mass index ≥40 kg/m ).
Moderate or severe immune compromise.
Residence in a nursing home.
Other chronic medical conditions or risk factors that a health care provider determines
would increase the risk of severe disease due to viral respiratory infection (eg, frailty,
concern for presence of undiagnosed chronic medical conditions, residence in a remote or
rural community where escalation of medical care is challenging).
Contraindications and precautions:
***
2

-- 38 of 81 --

For contraindications and precautions to RSV vaccine, refer to RSV Appendix.
◊ Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Completed primary series and received at least 1 dose Tdap at age 10 years or older: Td
or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Completed primary series and did NOT receive Tdap at age 10 years or older: 1 dose
Tdap, then Td or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Unvaccinated or incomplete primary vaccination series for tetanus, diphtheria, or
pertussis: Administer remaining doses (1, 2, or 3 doses) to complete 3-dose primary series. 1
dose Tdap followed by 1 dose Td or Tdap at least 4 weeks later, and a third dose of Td or Tdap
6-12 months later (Tdap is preferred as first dose and can be substituted for any Td dose),
then Td or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Special situations:
Pregnancy: 1 dose Tdap during each pregnancy, preferably in early part of gestational weeks
27-36.
Wound management: Persons with 3 or more doses of tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine:
For clean and minor wounds, administer Tdap or Td if more than 10 years since last dose of
tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine; for all other wounds, administer Tdap or Td if more than 5
years since last dose of tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine. Tdap is preferred for persons who
have not previously received Tdap or whose Tdap history is unknown. If a tetanus-toxoid-
containing vaccine is indicated for a pregnant person, use Tdap. For detailed information,
refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6903a5.htm.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap),
refer to Tdap Appendix.
§ Measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination
Routine vaccination:
No evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella: 1 dose.
Evidence of immunity: Born before 1957 (except for health care personnel, refer below),
documentation of receipt of MMR vaccine, laboratory evidence of immunity or disease
(diagnosis of disease without laboratory confirmation is not evidence of immunity).
Special situations:
Pregnancy with no evidence of immunity to rubella: MMR contraindicated during
pregnancy; after pregnancy (before discharge from health care facility), 1 dose.
Nonpregnant persons of childbearing age with no evidence of immunity to rubella: 1
dose.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection with CD4 percentages ≥15% and CD4
count ≥200 cells/mm for at least 6 months and no evidence of immunity to measles,
mumps, or rubella: Complete 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart; MMR contraindicated for
HIV infection with CD4 percentage <15% or CD4 count <200 cells/mm .
Severe immunocompromising conditions: MMR contraindicated.
Students in postsecondary educational institutions, international travelers, and
household or close, personal contacts of immunocompromised persons with no
evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella: Complete 2-dose series at least 4
weeks apart if previously did not receive any doses of MMR or 1 dose if previously received 1
dose MMR.
In mumps outbreak settings, for information about additional doses of MMR (including 3rd
dose of MMR), refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6701a7.htm.
3
3

-- 39 of 81 --

Health care personnel:
Born before 1957 with no evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella:
Consider 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart for protection against measles or mumps
or 1 dose for protection against rubella.
Born in 1957 or later with no evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella:
Complete 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart for protection against measles or mumps
or at least 1 dose for protection against rubella.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine, refer to
MMR Appendix.
¥ Varicella vaccination
Routine vaccination:
No evidence of immunity to varicella: 2-dose series 4-8 weeks apart if previously did not
receive varicella-containing vaccine (VAR or measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine [MMRV]
for children); if previously received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine, 1 dose at least 4
weeks after first dose.
Evidence of immunity: United States-born before 1980 (except for pregnant persons
and health care personnel [refer below]), documentation of 2 doses varicella-containing
vaccine at least 4 weeks apart, diagnosis or verification of history of varicella or herpes
zoster by a health care provider, laboratory evidence of immunity or disease.
Special situations:
Pregnancy with no evidence of immunity to varicella: VAR contraindicated during
pregnancy; after pregnancy (before discharge from health care facility), 1 dose if previously
received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine or dose 1 of 2-dose series (dose 2: 4 to 8 weeks
later) if previously did not receive any varicella-containing vaccine, regardless of whether
United States-born before 1980.
Health care personnel with no evidence of immunity to varicella: 1 dose if previously
received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine; 2-dose series 4-8 weeks apart if previously did
not receive any varicella-containing vaccine, regardless of whether United States-born before
1980.
HIV infection with CD4 percentages ≥15% and CD4 count ≥200 cells/mm with no
evidence of immunity: Vaccination may be considered (2 doses 3 months apart); VAR
contraindicated for HIV infection with CD4 percentage <15% or CD4 count <200 cells/mm .
Severe immunocompromising conditions: VAR contraindicated.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to varicella (VAR) vaccine, refer to VAR Appendix.
‡ Zoster vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 50 years or older (NOTE: Serologic evidence of prior varicella is not necessary for zoster
vaccination. However, if serologic evidence of varicella susceptibility becomes available,
providers should follow ACIP guidelines for varicella vaccination first. RZV is not indicated for
the prevention of varicella, and there are limited data on the use of RZV in persons without a
history of varicella or varicella vaccination): 2-dose series recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV;
Shingrix) 2-6 months apart (minimum interval: 4 weeks; repeat dose if administered too
soon), regardless of previous herpes zoster or history of zoster vaccine live (ZVL; Zostavax)
vaccination.
Special situations:
Pregnancy: There is currently no ACIP recommendation for RZV use in pregnancy. Consider
delaying RZV until after pregnancy.
3
3

-- 40 of 81 --

Immunocompromising conditions (including persons with HIV regardless of CD4 count;
NOTE: If there is no documented history of varicella, varicella vaccination, or herpes zoster,
providers should refer to the clinical considerations for use of RZV in immunocompromised
adults aged ≥19 years and the ACIP varicella vaccine recommendations for further guidance:
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7103a2.htm): 2-dose series recombinant zoster
vaccine (RZV; Shingrix) 2-6 months apart (minimum interval: 4 weeks; repeat dose if
administered too soon). For detailed information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/shingles/vaccination/immunocompromised-adults.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to zoster recombinant vaccine (RZV), refer to RZV
Appendix.
† Human papillomavirus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
All persons through age 26 years: Complete 2- or 3-dose series depending on age at initial
vaccination or condition.
Age 9-14 years at initial vaccination and received 1 dose or 2 doses less than 5
months apart: 1 additional dose.
Age 9-14 years at initial vaccination and received 2 doses at least 5 months apart:
HPV vaccination series complete, no additional dose needed.
Age 15 years or older at initial vaccination: 3-dose series at 0, 1-2 months, 6 months
(minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 12 weeks; dose 1 to
dose 3: 5 months; repeat dose if administered too soon).
No additional dose recommended when any HPV vaccine series of any valency has been
completed using the recommended dosing intervals.
Shared clinical decision-making:
Adults age 27-45 years: Based on shared clinical decision-making, complete a 2-dose series
(if initiated age 9-14 years) or 3-dose series (if initiated ≥15 years).
For additional information on shared clinical decision-making for HPV; refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/admin/downloads/isd-job-aid-scdm-hpv-shared-clinical-decision-
making-hpv.pdf.
Special situations:
Age ranges recommended above for routine and catch-up vaccination or shared clinical
decision-making also apply in special situations.
Immunocompromising conditions, including HIV infection: Complete 3-dose series,
even for those who initiate vaccination at age 9 through 14 years.
Pregnancy: Pregnancy testing is not needed before vaccination. HPV vaccination is not
recommended until after pregnancy. No intervention needed if inadvertently vaccinated
while pregnant.
Further considerations:
Some UpToDate contributors support an approach consistent with WHO recommendations:
1 or 2 doses of HPV vaccine for persons age 9-20 years, 2 doses for persons age 21 years or
older, and 3 doses for immunocompromised individuals.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination, refer to
HPV Appendix.
** Pneumococcal vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 50 years or older who have:

-- 41 of 81 --

Not previously received a dose of PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, or PCV21 or whose previous
vaccination history is unknown: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21.
If PCV15 is used, administer 1 dose PPSV23 at least 1 year after the PCV15 dose (may
use minimum interval of 8 weeks for adults with an immunocompromising condition
[NOTE: Immunocompromising conditions include chronic kidney failure, nephrotic
syndrome, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, generalized
malignancy, HIV infection, Hodgkin disease, leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
solid organ transplant, congenital or acquired asplenia, or sickle cell disease or other
hemoglobinopathies], cochlear implant, or cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] leak).
Previously received only PCV7: Follow the recommendation above.
Previously received only PCV13: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 1 year after the
last PCV13 dose.
Previously received only PPSV23: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at
least 1 year after the last PPSV23 dose.
If PCV15 is used, no additional PPSV23 doses are recommended.
Previously received both PCV13 and PPSV23 but NO PPSV23 was received at age 65
years or older: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 5 years after the last
pneumococcal vaccine dose.
Previously received both PCV13 and PPSV23, AND PPSV23 was received at age 65
years or older: Based on shared clinical decision-making, 1 dose of PCV20 or 1 dose of
PCV21 at least 5 years after the last pneumococcal vaccine dose.
For guidance on determining which pneumococcal vaccines a patient needs and when,
please refer to the mobile app which can be downloaded here:
www.cdc.gov/pneumococcal/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/app.html.
Special situations:
Age 19-49 years with certain underlying medical conditions or other risk factors who
have (NOTE: Underlying medical conditions or other risk factors include alcoholism, chronic
heart/liver/lung disease, chronic kidney failure, cigarette smoking, cochlear implant,
congenital or acquired asplenia, CSF leak, diabetes mellitus, generalized malignancy, HIV
infection, Hodgkin disease, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, leukemia,
lymphoma, multiple myeloma, nephrotic syndrome, solid organ transplant, or sickle cell
disease or other hemoglobinopathies):
Not previously received a PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, or PCV21 or whose previous
vaccination history is unknown: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21.
If PCV15 is used, administer 1 dose PPSV23 at least 1 year after the PCV15 dose (may
use minimum interval of 8 weeks for adults with an immunocompromising condition
[NOTE: Immunocompromising conditions include chronic kidney failure, nephrotic
syndrome, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, generalized
malignancy, HIV infection, Hodgkin disease, leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
solid organ transplant, congenital or acquired asplenia, or sickle cell disease or other
hemoglobinopathies], cochlear implant, or CSF leak).
Previously received only PCV7: Follow the recommendation above.
Previously received only PCV13: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 1 year after the
last PCV13.
Previously received only PPSV23: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or PCV21, at least 1
year after the last PPSV23 dose.
If PCV15 is used, no additional PPSV23 doses are recommended.
Previously received PCV13 and 1 dose of PPSV23: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at
least 5 years after the last pneumococcal vaccine dose.

-- 42 of 81 --

Adults aged 19 years and older who have received PCV20 or PCV21: No additional
pneumococcal vaccine dose recommended.
Pregnancy: No recommendation for PCV or PPSV23 due to limited data. Summary of existing
data on pneumococcal vaccination during pregnancy can be found at
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/rr/rr7203a1.htm.
PPSV23 not available: Adults aged 19 years or older who received PCV15, but have not yet
completed PPSV23 series, can complete the series with either 1 dose of PCV20 or 1 dose of
PCV21 if they no longer have access to PPSV23.
For guidance on determining which pneumococcal vaccines a patient needs and when,
please refer to the mobile app which can be downloaded here:
www.cdc.gov/pneumococcal/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/app.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Pneumococcal conjugate (PCV15 and PCV20), refer
to PCV Appendix; and for Pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPSV23), refer to PPSV23 Appendix.
¶¶ Hepatitis A vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Any person who is not fully vaccinated and requests vaccination (identification of risk
factor not required): Complete 2-dose series HepA (Havrix 6-12 months apart or Vaqta 6-18
months apart [minimum interval: 6 months]) or 3-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix at 0, 1, 6
months [minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 5 months]).
Special situations:
Any person who is not fully vaccinated and who is at risk for hepatitis A virus infection
or severe disease from hepatitis A virus infection: Complete 2-dose series HepA or 3-dose
series HepA-HepB as above. Risk factors include:
Chronic liver disease including persons with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, cirrhosis, fatty liver
disease, alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level greater than twice the upper limit of normal.
HIV infection.
Men who have sex with men (MSM).
Injection or noninjection drug use.
Persons experiencing homelessness.
Work with hepatitis A virus in research laboratory or with nonhuman primates with
hepatitis A virus infection.
Travel in countries with high or intermediate endemic hepatitis A: HepA-HepB
(Twinrix) may be administered on an accelerated schedule of 3 doses at 0, 7, and 21-30
days, followed by a booster dose at 12 months.
Close, personal contact with international adoptee (eg, household or regular
babysitting) in first 60 days after arrival from country with high or intermediate endemic
hepatitis A: Dose 1 as soon as adoption is planned; preferably at least 2 weeks before
adoptee's arrival.
Pregnancy if at risk for infection or severe outcome from infection during pregnancy.
Settings for exposure, including health care settings serving persons who use injection
or noninjection drugs, or group homes and nonresidential day care facilities for
developmentally disabled persons (individual risk factor screening not required).
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to hepatitis A (HepA) vaccination, refer to HepA
Appendix.
ΔΔ Hepatitis B vaccination
Routine vaccination:

-- 43 of 81 --

Age 19 through 59 years: Complete a 2- or 3- or 4-dose series.
2-dose series only applies when 2 doses of Heplisav-B are used at least 4 weeks apart.
3-dose series Engerix-B, PreHevbrio (NOTE: PreHevbrio is not recommended in
pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons), or Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6
months (minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 8 weeks; dose 1
to dose 3: 16 weeks).
3-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix) at 0, 1, 6 months (minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose
2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 5 months).
4-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix) accelerated schedule of 3 doses at 0, 7, and 21-30
days, followed by a booster dose at 12 months.
Age 60 years or older without known risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection may receive
a HepB vaccine series.
Age 60 years or older with known risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection should receive a
HepB vaccine series.
Any adult age 60 years of age or older who requests HepB vaccination should receive a
HepB vaccine series.
Risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection include:
Chronic liver disease including persons with hepatitis C, cirrhosis, fatty liver disease,
alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, ALT or AST level greater than twice the
upper limit of normal.
HIV infection.
Sexual exposure risk (eg, sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg]-
positive persons, sexually active persons not in mutually monogamous relationships,
persons seeking evaluation or treatment for a sexually transmitted infection, MSM).
Current or recent injection drug use.
Percutaneous or mucosal risk for exposure to blood (eg, household contacts of
HBsAg-positive persons, residents and staff of facilities for developmentally disabled
persons, health care and public safety personnel with reasonably anticipated risk for
exposure to blood or blood-contaminated body fluids, persons on maintenance
dialysis [including in-center or home hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis], persons
who are predialysis, and patients with diabetes [NOTE: Age 60 years or older with
diabetes: Based on shared clinical decision making, 2-, 3-, or 4-dose series as above]).
Incarceration.
Travel in countries with high or intermediate endemic hepatitis B.
Special situations:
Patients on dialysis: Complete a 3- or 4-dose series.
3-dose series Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: Use Dialysis Formulation 1 mL = 40
mcg).
4-dose series Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 6 months (NOTE: Use 2 mL dose instead of the
normal adult dose of 1 mL).
Age 20 years or older with an immunocompromising condition: Complete a 2- or 3- or 4-
dose series.
3-dose series Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: Use Dialysis Formulation 1 mL = 40
mcg).
4-dose series Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 6 months (NOTE: Use 2 mL dose instead of the
normal adult dose of 1 mL).
2-dose series Heplisav-B at 0, 1 months.
3-dose series PreHevbrio at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: PreHevbrio is not recommended in
pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons).
Contraindications and precautions:

-- 44 of 81 --

For contraindications and precautions to hepatitis B (HepB) vaccination, refer to HepB
Appendix.
◊◊ Meningococcal vaccination
Special situations for MenACWY:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), HIV infection,
persistent complement component deficiency, complement inhibitor (eg, eculizumab,
ravulizumab) use: 2-dose primary series Menveo or MenQuadfi at least 8 weeks apart; 1
booster dose 5 years after primary series and every 5 years if risk remains.
Travel in countries with hyperendemic or epidemic meningococcal disease, or for
microbiologists routinely exposed to Neisseria meningitidis: 1 dose Menveo or
MenQuadfi; 1 booster dose 5 years after primary series and every 5 years if risk remains.
First-year college students who live in residential housing (if not previously vaccinated
at age 16 years or older) or military recruits: 1 dose Menveo or MenQuadfi.
MenACWY vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenB vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
For MenACWY recommendations in outbreak setting (eg, in community or organizational
settings, or among MSM) and additional meningococcal vaccination information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6909a1.htm.
Shared clinical decision-making for MenB:
Adolescents and young adults age 16-23 years (age 16-18 years preferred; NOTE: To
optimize rapid protection [eg, for students starting college in less than 6 months], a 3-dose
series [0, 1-2, 6 months] may be administered) not at increased risk for meningococcal
disease: Based on shared clinical decision-making.
Bexsero or Trumenba (use same brand for all doses): 2-dose series at least 6 months
apart (if dose 2 is administered earlier than 6 months, administer dose 3 at least 4
months after dose 2)
MenB vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenACWY vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
Special situations for MenB:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), persistent
complement component deficiency, complement inhibitor (eg, eculizumab,
ravulizumab) use, or microbiologists routinely exposed to Neisseria meningitidis.
Bexsero or Trumenba (use same brand for all doses including booster doses): 3-dose
primary series at 0, 1-2, 6 months (if dose 2 was administered at least 6 months after
dose 1, dose 3 not needed; if dose 3 is administered earlier than 4 months after dose 2, a
4th dose should be administered at least 4 months after dose 3).
Booster doses: 1 booster dose 1 year after primary series and every 2-3 years if risk
remains.
Pregnancy: Delay MenB until after pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons.
May administer if at increased risk and vaccination benefits outweigh potential risks.
For MenB recommendations in outbreak setting (eg, in community or organizational
settings and among MSM) and additional meningococcal vaccination information refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6909a1.htm.
MenB vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenACWY vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
Adults may receive a single dose of Penbraya (MenACWY-TT/MenB-FHbp) as an alternative to
separate administration of MenACWY and MenB when both vaccines would be given on the
same clinic day. For adults not at increased risk, if Penbraya is used for dose 1 MenB, then
MenB-FHbp (Trumenba) should be administered for dose 2 MenB. For adults at increased
risk of meningococcal disease, Penbraya may be used for additional MenACWY and MenB

-- 45 of 81 --

doses (including booster doses) if both would be given on the same clinic day and at least 6
months have elapsed since most recent Penbraya dose.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to meningococcal ACWY (MenACWY) [MenACWY-CRM
(Menveo); MenACWY-D (Menactra); MenACWY-TT (MenQuadfi)], refer to MenACWY Appendix.
For contraindications and precautions to meningococcal B (MenB) [MenB-4C (Bexsero);
MenB-FHbp (Trumenba)], refer to MenB Appendix.
§§ Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccination
Special situations:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease): 1 dose if previously did
not receive Hib vaccine.
Elective splenectomy: 1 dose preferably at least 14 days before splenectomy.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT): 3-dose series 4 weeks apart starting 6-12
months after successful transplant, regardless of Hib vaccination history.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccination,
refer to Hib Appendix.
¥¥ Mpox vaccination
Special situations:
Any person at risk for mpox infection: Complete 2-dose series, 28 days apart.
Risk factors for mpox infection include:
Persons who are gay or bisexual and other MSM, transgender, or nonbinary people who
in the past 6 months have had:
A new diagnosis of at least 1 sexually transmitted disease.
More than 1 sex partner.
Sex at a commercial sex venue.
Sex in association with a large public event in a geographic area where mpox
transmission is occurring.
Persons who are sexual partners of the persons described above.
Persons who anticipate experiencing any of the situations described above.
Pregnancy: There is currently no ACIP recommendation for Jynneos use in pregnancy due to
lack of safety data in pregnant persons. Pregnant persons with any risk factor described
above may receive Jynneos.
Health care personnel: Vaccination to protect against occupational risk in health care
settings is not routinely recommended.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to mpox, refer to Mpox Appendix.
‡‡ Poliovirus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Adults known or suspected to be unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated: Administer
remaining doses (1, 2, or 3 inactivated poliovirus [IPV] doses) to complete a 3-dose primary
series (NOTE: Complete primary series consists of at least 3 doses of IPV or trivalent oral
poliovirus vaccine [tOPV] in any combination). Unless there are specific reasons to believe
they were not vaccinated, most adults who were born and raised in the United States can
assume they were vaccinated against polio as children.
Special situations:
Adults at increased risk of exposure to poliovirus who completed primary series (NOTE:
Complete primary series consists of at least 3 doses of IPV or tOPV in any combination): May
administer one lifetime IPV booster.

-- 46 of 81 --

For detailed information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/polio/hcp/recommendations.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Poliovirus vaccine, IPV, refer to Poliovirus Appendix.
Reproduced from: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Adult Immunization Schedule by Age, Recommendations for
Ages 19 Years or Older, United States, 2025. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/imz-schedules/adult-age.html (Accessed on December 10, 2024).
Graphic 82634 Version 42.0

-- 47 of 81 --

Figure 2: Adult immunization schedule by medical condition and other
indication – Recommendations for ages 19 years or older, United
States, 2025

-- 48 of 81 --

Administer recommended vaccines if vaccination history is incomplete or unknown. Do not restart or
add doses to vaccine series if there are extended intervals between doses. The use of trade names is
for identification purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the ACIP or CDC.
NOTES
For vaccine recommendations for persons 18 years of age or younger, refer to the Recommended
Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule.
Additional information
For calculating intervals between doses, 4 weeks = 28 days. Intervals of ≥4 months are
determined by calendar months.
Within a number range (eg, 12-18), a dash (–) should be read as "through."
Vaccine doses administered ≤4 days before the minimum age or interval are considered valid.
Doses of any vaccine administered ≥5 days earlier than the minimum age or minimum interval
should not be counted as valid and should be repeated. The repeat dose should be spaced after
the invalid dose by the recommended minimum interval. For further details, refer to Table 3-2,
Recommended and minimum ages and intervals between vaccine doses, in Timing and Spacing
of Immunobiologics.
Information on travel vaccination requirements and recommendations is available at
cdc.gov/travel/.
For vaccination of persons with immunodeficiencies, refer to Table 8-1, Vaccination of persons
with primary and secondary immunodeficiencies, in Altered Immunocompetence.
For information about vaccination in the setting of a vaccine-preventable disease outbreak,
contact your state or local health department.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a no-fault alternative to the
traditional legal system for resolving vaccine injury claims. All vaccines included in the adult
immunization schedule except PPSV23, RSV, RZV, mpox, and COVID-19 vaccines are covered by
the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP). Mpox and COVID-19 vaccines are
covered by the Countermeasures Injury Compensation Program (CICP). For more information,
refer to www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation or www.hrsa.gov/cicp.
HSCT: hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
* Precaution for LAIV4 does not apply to alcoholism.
¶ COVID-19 vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 19-64 years.
Unvaccinated:
1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech.
2 doses 2024-25 Novavax at 0, 3-8 weeks.
Previously vaccinated before 2024-25 vaccine with:
1 or more doses Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax
or Pfizer-BioNTech at least 8 weeks after the most recent dose.
1 dose Novavax: 1 dose 2024-25 Novavax 3-8 weeks after most recent dose. If more
than 8 weeks after the most recent dose, administer 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or
Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech.
2 or more doses Novavax: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech at
least 8 weeks after the most recent dose.

-- 49 of 81 --

1 or more doses Janssen: 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech.
Age 65 years and older.
Unvaccinated: Follow recommendations above for unvaccinated persons ages 19-64
years and administer dose 2 of 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months
later (minimum interval 2 months).
Previously vaccinated before 2024-25 vaccine: Follow recommendations above for
previously vaccinated persons ages 19-64 years and administer dose 2 of 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months).
Special situations:
Persons who are moderately or severely immunocompromised. Use vaccine from the
same manufacturer for all doses in the initial vaccination series.
Unvaccinated:
4 doses (3-dose initial series 2024-25 Moderna at 0, 4 weeks, and at least 4 weeks after
dose 2, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months
later [minimum interval 2 months]). May administer additional doses.
4 doses (3-dose initial series 2024-25 Pfizer-BioNTech at 0, 3 weeks, and at least 4
weeks after dose 2, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-
BioNTech 6 months later [minimum interval 2 months]). May administer additional
doses.
3 doses (2-dose initial series 2024-25 Novavax at 0, 3 weeks, followed by 1 dose
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later [minimum interval 2 months]).
May administer additional doses.
Incomplete initial vaccination series before 2024-25 vaccine:
Previous vaccination with Moderna
1 dose Moderna: Complete initial series with 2 doses 2024-25 Moderna at least 4
weeks apart (administer dose 1 4 weeks after most recent dose), followed by 1
dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum
interval 2 months). May administer additional doses.
2 doses Moderna: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna at least 4
weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or
Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer
additional doses.
Previous vaccination with Pfizer-BioNTech
1 dose Pfizer-BioNTech: Complete initial series with 2 doses 2024-25 Pfizer-
BioNTech at least 4 weeks apart (administer dose 1 3 weeks after most recent
dose), followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6
months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer additional doses.
2 doses Pfizer-BioNTech: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Pfizer-
BioNTech at least 4 weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2
months). May administer additional doses.
Previous vaccination with Novavax
1 dose Novavax: Complete initial series with 1 dose 2024-25 Novavax at least 3
weeks after most recent dose, followed by 1 dose 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or
Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months later (minimum interval 2 months). May administer
additional doses.
Completed the initial vaccination series before 2024-25 vaccine with:
3 or more doses Moderna or 3 or more doses Pfizer-BioNTech: 2 doses 2024-25
Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6 months apart (minimum interval 2 months).
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶
¶¶¶

-- 50 of 81 --

Administer dose 1 at least 8 weeks after the most recent dose. May administer
additional doses.
2 or more doses Novavax: 2 doses 2024-25 Moderna or Novavax or Pfizer-BioNTech 6
months apart (minimum interval 2 months). Administer dose 1 at least 8 weeks after
the most recent dose. May administer additional doses.
¶¶¶ Additional doses of 2024-25 COVID-19 vaccine for moderately or severely
immunocompromised:
Based on shared clinical decision-making and administered at least 2 months after the
most recent dose (refer to Table 2 at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-
considerations/interim-considerations-us.html#table-02). For description of moderate
and severe immunocompromising conditions and treatment, refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/interim-considerations-
us.html#immunocompromising-conditions-treatment.
Unvaccinated persons have never received any COVID-19 vaccine doses. There is no
preferential recommendation for the use of one COVID-19 vaccine over another when
more than one recommended age-appropriate vaccine is available. Administer an age-
appropriate COVID-19 vaccine product for each dose.
For more information about the interchangeability of COVID-19 vaccines, refer to
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/covid-19/clinical-considerations/interim-considerations-
us.html#Interchangeability.
Current COVID-19 schedule and dose formulation available at
www.cdc.gov/covidschedule.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to COVID-19 vaccination, refer to COVID-19 Appendix.
Δ Influenza vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 19 years or older: 1 dose any influenza vaccine appropriate for age and health status
annually.
Solid organ transplant recipients aged 19 through 64 years receiving
immunosuppressive medications: HD-IIV3 and aIIV3 are acceptable options. No
preference over other age-appropriate IIV3 or RIV3.
Age 65 years or older: Any one of HD-IIV3, RIV3, or aIIV3 is preferred. If none of these
three vaccines are available, then any other age-appropriate influenza vaccine should be
used.
For the 2024-25 season, refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/rr/rr7305a1.htm.
For the 2025-26 season, refer to the 2025-26 ACIP influenza vaccine recommendations.
Special situations:
Close contacts (eg, caregivers, health care workers) of severely immunosuppressed
persons who require a protected environment: Should not receive LAIV3. If LAIV3 is given,
they should avoid contact with/caring for such immunosuppressed persons for 7 days after
vaccination.
NOTE: Persons with an egg allergy can receive any influenza vaccine (egg-based and non-egg-
based) appropriate for age and health status.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to influenza vaccination, refer to IIV3 Appendix, LAIV3
Appendix, ccIIV3 Appendix, and RIV3 Appendix.
◊ Respiratory syncytial virus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Pregnant persons of any age.
¶¶¶
¶¶¶

-- 51 of 81 --

Pregnant at 32 weeks 0 days through 36 weeks and 6 days gestation from September
through January in most of the continental United States (NOTE: Providers in
jurisdictions with RSV seasonality that differs from most of the continental United States
[eg, Alaska, jurisdiction with tropical climate] should follow guidance from public health
authorities on timing of administration. Refer to the 2025 Child and Adolescent
Immunization Schedule for considerations regarding nirsevimab administration to
infants): 1 dose Abrysvo. Administer RSV vaccine regardless of previous RSV infection.
Either maternal RSV vaccination with Abrysvo or infant immunization with nirsevimab (RSV
monoclonal antibody) is recommended to prevent severe respiratory syncytial virus
disease in infants.
All other pregnant persons: RSV vaccine not recommended.
Subsequent pregnancies: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed in subsequent pregnancies. Infants born to
pregnant persons who received RSV vaccine during a previous pregnancy should receive
nirsevimab.
Age 75 years or older.
Unvaccinated: 1 dose (Arexvy or Abrysvo or mResvia). Additional doses not
recommended.
Previously vaccinated: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed.
Special situations:
Age 60-74 years.
Unvaccinated and at increased risk of severe RSV disease : 1 dose (Arexvy or
Abrysvo or mResvia). Additional doses not recommended.
Previously vaccinated: Additional doses not recommended. No data are available to
inform whether additional doses are needed.
Persons 60 years and older can get RSV vaccine at any time but best to administer in late
summer and early fall before RSV spreads in communities—ideally August through October in
most of continental United States. For further guidance, refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/73/wr/mm7332e1.htm.
ΔΔΔ People can self-attest to the presence of a risk factor. The following medical and
other conditions increase the risk of severe RSV disease:
Chronic cardiovascular disease (eg, heart failure, coronary artery disease, congenital heart
disease). Excludes isolated hypertension.
Chronic lung or respiratory disease (eg, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
emphysema, asthma, interstitial lung disease, cystic fibrosis).
End-stage renal disease, dependence on hemodialysis, or other renal replacement
therapy.
Diabetes mellitus complicated by chronic kidney disease, neuropathy, retinopathy, or
other end-organ damage.
Diabetes mellitus requiring treatment with insulin or sodium-glucose cotransporter 2
(SGLT2) inhibitor.
Neurologic or neuromuscular conditions causing impaired airway clearance or respiratory
muscle weakness (eg, post-stroke dysphagia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscular
dystrophy). Excludes history of stroke without impaired airway clearance.
Chronic liver disease (eg, cirrhosis).
Chronic hematologic conditions (eg, sickle cell disease, thalassemia).
Severe obesity (body mass index ≥40 kg/m ).
Moderate or severe immune compromise.
Residence in a nursing home.
ΔΔΔ
2

-- 52 of 81 --

Other chronic medical conditions or risk factors that a health care provider determines
would increase the risk of severe disease due to viral respiratory infection (eg, frailty,
concern for presence of undiagnosed chronic medical conditions, residence in a remote or
rural community where escalation of medical care is challenging).
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to RSV vaccine, refer to RSV Appendix.
§ Tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Completed primary series and received at least 1 dose Tdap at age 10 years or older: Td
or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Completed primary series and did NOT receive Tdap at age 10 years or older: 1 dose
Tdap, then Td or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Unvaccinated or incomplete primary vaccination series for tetanus, diphtheria, or
pertussis: Administer remaining doses (1, 2, or 3 doses) to complete 3-dose primary series. 1
dose Tdap followed by 1 dose Td or Tdap at least 4 weeks later, and a third dose of Td or Tdap
6-12 months later (Tdap is preferred as first dose and can be substituted for any Td dose),
then Td or Tdap every 10 years thereafter.
Special situations:
Pregnancy: 1 dose Tdap during each pregnancy, preferably in early part of gestational weeks
27-36.
Wound management: Persons with 3 or more doses of tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine:
For clean and minor wounds, administer Tdap or Td if more than 10 years since last dose of
tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine; for all other wounds, administer Tdap or Td if more than 5
years since last dose of tetanus-toxoid-containing vaccine. Tdap is preferred for persons who
have not previously received Tdap or whose Tdap history is unknown. If a tetanus-toxoid-
containing vaccine is indicated for a pregnant person, use Tdap. For detailed information,
refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6903a5.htm.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to tetanus, diphtheria, and acellular pertussis (Tdap),
refer to Tdap Appendix.
¥ Measles, mumps, and rubella vaccination
Routine vaccination:
No evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella: 1 dose.
Evidence of immunity: Born before 1957 (except for health care personnel, refer below),
documentation of receipt of MMR vaccine, laboratory evidence of immunity or disease
(diagnosis of disease without laboratory confirmation is not evidence of immunity).
Special situations:
Pregnancy with no evidence of immunity to rubella: MMR contraindicated during
pregnancy; after pregnancy (before discharge from health care facility), 1 dose.
Nonpregnant persons of childbearing age with no evidence of immunity to rubella: 1
dose.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection with CD4 percentages ≥15% and CD4
count ≥200 cells/mm for at least 6 months and no evidence of immunity to measles,
mumps, or rubella: Complete 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart; MMR contraindicated for
HIV infection with CD4 percentage <15% or CD4 count <200 cells/mm .
Severe immunocompromising conditions: MMR contraindicated.
Students in postsecondary educational institutions, international travelers, and
household or close, personal contacts of immunocompromised persons with no
3
3

-- 53 of 81 --

evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella: Complete 2-dose series at least 4
weeks apart if previously did not receive any doses of MMR or 1 dose if previously received 1
dose MMR.
In mumps outbreak settings, for information about additional doses of MMR (including 3rd
dose of MMR), refer to www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm6701a7.htm.
Health care personnel:
Born before 1957 with no evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella:
Consider 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart for protection against measles or mumps
or 1 dose for protection against rubella.
Born in 1957 or later with no evidence of immunity to measles, mumps, or rubella:
Complete 2-dose series at least 4 weeks apart for protection against measles or mumps
or at least 1 dose for protection against rubella.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine, refer to
MMR Appendix.
‡ Varicella vaccination
Routine vaccination:
No evidence of immunity to varicella: 2-dose series 4-8 weeks apart if previously did not
receive varicella-containing vaccine (VAR or measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine [MMRV]
for children); if previously received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine, 1 dose at least 4
weeks after first dose.
Evidence of immunity: United States-born before 1980 (except for pregnant persons
and health care personnel [refer below]), documentation of 2 doses varicella-containing
vaccine at least 4 weeks apart, diagnosis or verification of history of varicella or herpes
zoster by a health care provider, laboratory evidence of immunity or disease.
Special situations:
Pregnancy with no evidence of immunity to varicella: VAR contraindicated during
pregnancy; after pregnancy (before discharge from health care facility), 1 dose if previously
received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine or dose 1 of 2-dose series (dose 2: 4 to 8 weeks
later) if previously did not receive any varicella-containing vaccine, regardless of whether
United States-born before 1980.
Health care personnel with no evidence of immunity to varicella: 1 dose if previously
received 1 dose varicella-containing vaccine; 2-dose series 4-8 weeks apart if previously did
not receive any varicella-containing vaccine, regardless of whether United States-born before
1980.
HIV infection with CD4 percentages ≥15% and CD4 count ≥200 cells/mm with no
evidence of immunity: Vaccination may be considered (2 doses 3 months apart); VAR
contraindicated for HIV infection with CD4 percentage <15% or CD4 count <200 cells/mm .
Severe immunocompromising conditions: VAR contraindicated.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to varicella (VAR) vaccine, refer to VAR Appendix.
† Zoster vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 50 years or older (NOTE: Serologic evidence of prior varicella is not necessary for zoster
vaccination. However, if serologic evidence of varicella susceptibility becomes available,
providers should follow ACIP guidelines for varicella vaccination first. RZV is not indicated for
the prevention of varicella, and there are limited data on the use of RZV in persons without a
history of varicella or varicella vaccination): 2-dose series recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV;
Shingrix) 2-6 months apart (minimum interval: 4 weeks; repeat dose if administered too
3
3

-- 54 of 81 --

soon), regardless of previous herpes zoster or history of zoster vaccine live (ZVL; Zostavax)
vaccination.
Special situations:
Pregnancy: There is currently no ACIP recommendation for RZV use in pregnancy. Consider
delaying RZV until after pregnancy.
Immunocompromising conditions (including persons with HIV regardless of CD4 count;
NOTE: If there is no documented history of varicella, varicella vaccination, or herpes zoster,
providers should refer to the clinical considerations for use of RZV in immunocompromised
adults aged ≥19 years and the ACIP varicella vaccine recommendations for further guidance:
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/71/wr/mm7103a2.htm): 2-dose series recombinant zoster
vaccine (RZV; Shingrix) 2-6 months apart (minimum interval: 4 weeks; repeat dose if
administered too soon). For detailed information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/shingles/vaccination/immunocompromised-adults.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to zoster recombinant vaccine (RZV), refer to RZV
Appendix.
** Human papillomavirus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
All persons through age 26 years: Complete 2- or 3-dose series depending on age at initial
vaccination or condition.
Age 9-14 years at initial vaccination and received 1 dose or 2 doses less than 5
months apart: 1 additional dose.
Age 9-14 years at initial vaccination and received 2 doses at least 5 months apart:
HPV vaccination series complete, no additional dose needed.
Age 15 years or older at initial vaccination: 3-dose series at 0, 1-2 months, 6 months
(minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 12 weeks; dose 1 to
dose 3: 5 months; repeat dose if administered too soon).
No additional dose recommended when any HPV vaccine series of any valency has been
completed using the recommended dosing intervals.
Shared clinical decision-making:
Adults age 27-45 years: Based on shared clinical decision-making, complete a 2-dose series
(if initiated age 9-14 years) or 3-dose series (if initiated ≥15 years).
For additional information on shared clinical decision-making for HPV; refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/admin/downloads/isd-job-aid-scdm-hpv-shared-clinical-decision-
making-hpv.pdf.
Special situations:
Age ranges recommended above for routine and catch-up vaccination or shared clinical
decision-making also apply in special situations.
Immunocompromising conditions, including HIV infection: Complete 3-dose series,
even for those who initiate vaccination at age 9 through 14 years.
Pregnancy: Pregnancy testing is not needed before vaccination. HPV vaccination is not
recommended until after pregnancy. No intervention needed if inadvertently vaccinated
while pregnant.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination, refer to
HPV Appendix.
¶¶ Pneumococcal vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Age 50 years or older who have:

-- 55 of 81 --

Not previously received a dose of PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, or PCV21 or whose previous
vaccination history is unknown: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21.
If PCV15 is used, administer 1 dose PPSV23 at least 1 year after the PCV15 dose (may
use minimum interval of 8 weeks for adults with an immunocompromising condition
[NOTE: Immunocompromising conditions include chronic renal failure, nephrotic
syndrome, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, generalized
malignancy, HIV infection, Hodgkin disease, leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
solid organ transplant, congenital or acquired asplenia, or sickle cell disease or other
hemoglobinopathies], cochlear implant, or cerebrospinal fluid [CSF] leak).
Previously received only PCV7: Follow the recommendation above.
Previously received only PCV13: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 1 year after the
last PCV13 dose.
Previously received only PPSV23: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at
least 1 year after the last PPSV23 dose.
If PCV15 is used, no additional PPSV23 doses are recommended.
Previously received both PCV13 and PPSV23 but NO PPSV23 was received at age 65
years or older: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 5 years after the last
pneumococcal vaccine dose.
Previously received both PCV13 and PPSV23, AND PPSV23 was received at age 65
years or older: Based on shared clinical decision-making, 1 dose of PCV20 or 1 dose of
PCV21 at least 5 years after the last pneumococcal vaccine dose.
For guidance on determining which pneumococcal vaccines a patient needs and when,
please refer to the mobile app which can be downloaded here:
www.cdc.gov/pneumococcal/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/app.html.
Special situations:
Age 19-49 years with certain underlying medical conditions or other risk factors who
have (NOTE: Underlying medical conditions or other risk factors include alcoholism, chronic
heart/liver/lung disease, chronic renal failure, cigarette smoking, cochlear implant,
congenital or acquired asplenia, CSF leak, diabetes mellitus, generalized malignancy, HIV
infection, Hodgkin disease, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, leukemia,
lymphoma, multiple myeloma, nephrotic syndrome, solid organ transplant, or sickle cell
disease or other hemoglobinopathies):
Not previously received a PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, or PCV21 or whose previous
vaccination history is unknown: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21.
If PCV15 is used, administer 1 dose PPSV23 at least 1 year after the PCV15 dose (may
use minimum interval of 8 weeks for adults with an immunocompromising condition
[NOTE: Immunocompromising conditions include chronic renal failure, nephrotic
syndrome, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic immunosuppression, generalized
malignancy, HIV infection, Hodgkin disease, leukemia, lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
solid organ transplant, congenital or acquired asplenia, or sickle cell disease or other
hemoglobinopathies], cochlear implant, or CSF leak).
Previously received only PCV7: Follow the recommendation above.
Previously received only PCV13: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at least 1 year after the
last PCV13.
Previously received only PPSV23: 1 dose PCV15 or 1 dose PCV20 or PCV21, at least 1
year after the last PPSV23 dose.
If PCV15 is used, no additional PPSV23 doses are recommended.
Previously received PCV13 and 1 dose of PPSV23: 1 dose PCV20 or 1 dose PCV21 at
least 5 years after the last pneumococcal vaccine dose.

-- 56 of 81 --

Adults aged 19 years and older who have received PCV20 or PCV21: No additional
pneumococcal vaccine dose recommended.
Pregnancy: No recommendation for PCV or PPSV23 due to limited data. Summary of existing
data on pneumococcal vaccination during pregnancy can be found at
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/rr/rr7203a1.htm.
PPSV23 not available: Adults aged 19 years or older who received PCV15, but have not yet
completed PPSV23 series, can complete the series with either 1 dose of PCV20 or 1 dose of
PCV21 if they no longer have access to PPSV23.
For guidance on determining which pneumococcal vaccines a patient needs and when,
please refer to the mobile app which can be downloaded here:
www.cdc.gov/pneumococcal/hcp/vaccine-recommendations/app.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Pneumococcal conjugate (PCV15 and PCV20), refer
to PCV Appendix; and for Pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPSV23), refer to PPSV23 Appendix.
ΔΔ Hepatitis A vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Any person who is not fully vaccinated and requests vaccination (identification of risk
factor not required): Complete 2-dose series HepA (Havrix 6-12 months apart or Vaqta 6-18
months apart [minimum interval: 6 months]) or 3-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix at 0, 1, 6
months [minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 5 months]).
Special situations:
Any person who is not fully vaccinated and who is at risk for hepatitis A virus infection
or severe disease from hepatitis A virus infection: Complete 2-dose series HepA or 3-dose
series HepA-HepB as above. Risk factors include:
Chronic liver disease including persons with hepatitis B, hepatitis C, cirrhosis, fatty liver
disease, alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level greater than twice the upper limit of normal.
HIV infection.
Men who have sex with men (MSM).
Injection or noninjection drug use.
Persons experiencing homelessness.
Work with hepatitis A virus in research laboratory or with nonhuman primates with
hepatitis A virus infection.
Travel in countries with high or intermediate endemic hepatitis A: HepA-HepB
(Twinrix) may be administered on an accelerated schedule of 3 doses at 0, 7, and 21-30
days, followed by a booster dose at 12 months.
Close, personal contact with international adoptee (eg, household or regular
babysitting) in first 60 days after arrival from country with high or intermediate endemic
hepatitis A: Dose 1 as soon as adoption is planned; preferably at least 2 weeks before
adoptee's arrival.
Pregnancy if at risk for infection or severe outcome from infection during pregnancy.
Settings for exposure, including health care settings serving persons who use injection
or noninjection drugs, or group homes and nonresidential day care facilities for
developmentally disabled persons (individual risk factor screening not required).
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to hepatitis A (HepA) vaccination, refer to HepA
Appendix.
◊◊ Hepatitis B vaccination
Routine vaccination:

-- 57 of 81 --

Age 19 through 59 years: Complete a 2- or 3- or 4-dose series.
2-dose series only applies when 2 doses of Heplisav-B are used at least 4 weeks apart.
3-dose series Engerix-B, PreHevbrio (NOTE: PreHevbrio is not recommended in
pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons), or Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6
months (minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose 2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 8 weeks; dose 1
to dose 3: 16 weeks).
3-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix) at 0, 1, 6 months (minimum intervals: dose 1 to dose
2: 4 weeks; dose 2 to dose 3: 5 months).
4-dose series HepA-HepB (Twinrix) accelerated schedule of 3 doses at 0, 7, and 21-30
days, followed by a booster dose at 12 months.
Age 60 years or older without known risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection may receive
a HepB vaccine series.
Age 60 years or older with known risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection should receive a
HepB vaccine series.
Any adult age 60 years of age or older who requests HepB vaccination should receive a
HepB vaccine series.
Risk factors for hepatitis B virus infection include:
Chronic liver disease including persons with hepatitis C, cirrhosis, fatty liver disease,
alcoholic liver disease, autoimmune hepatitis, ALT or AST level greater than twice the
upper limit of normal.
HIV infection.
Sexual exposure risk (eg, sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg]-
positive persons, sexually active persons not in mutually monogamous relationships,
persons seeking evaluation or treatment for a sexually transmitted infection, MSM).
Current or recent injection drug use.
Percutaneous or mucosal risk for exposure to blood (eg, household contacts of
HBsAg-positive persons, residents and staff of facilities for developmentally disabled
persons, health care and public safety personnel with reasonably anticipated risk for
exposure to blood or blood-contaminated body fluids, persons on maintenance
dialysis [including in-center or home hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis], persons
who are predialysis, and patients with diabetes [NOTE: Age 60 years or older with
diabetes: Based on shared clinical decision making, 2-, 3-, or 4-dose series as above]).
Incarceration.
Travel in countries with high or intermediate endemic hepatitis B.
Special situations:
Patients on dialysis: Complete a 3- or 4-dose series.
3-dose series Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: Use Dialysis Formulation 1 mL = 40
mcg).
4-dose series Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 6 months (NOTE: Use 2 mL dose instead of the
normal adult dose of 1 mL).
Age 20 years or older with an immunocompromising condition: Complete a 2- or 3- or 4-
dose series.
3-dose series Recombivax HB at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: Use Dialysis Formulation 1 mL = 40
mcg).
4-dose series Engerix-B at 0, 1, 2, and 6 months (NOTE: Use 2 mL dose instead of the
normal adult dose of 1 mL).
2-dose series Heplisav-B at 0, 1 months.
3-dose series PreHevbrio at 0, 1, 6 months (NOTE: PreHevbrio is not recommended in
pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons).
Contraindications and precautions:

-- 58 of 81 --

For contraindications and precautions to hepatitis B (HepB) vaccination, refer to HepB
Appendix.
§§ Meningococcal vaccination
Special situations for MenACWY:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), HIV infection,
persistent complement component deficiency, complement inhibitor (eg, eculizumab,
ravulizumab) use: 2-dose primary series Menveo or MenQuadfi at least 8 weeks apart; 1
booster dose 5 years after primary series and every 5 years if risk remains.
Travel in countries with hyperendemic or epidemic meningococcal disease, or for
microbiologists routinely exposed to Neisseria meningitidis: 1 dose Menveo or
MenQuadfi; 1 booster dose 5 years after primary series and every 5 years if risk remains.
First-year college students who live in residential housing (if not previously vaccinated
at age 16 years or older) or military recruits: 1 dose Menveo or MenQuadfi.
MenACWY vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenB vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
For MenACWY recommendations in outbreak setting (eg, in community or organizational
settings, or among MSM) and additional meningococcal vaccination information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6909a1.htm.
Shared clinical decision-making for MenB:
Adolescents and young adults age 16-23 years (age 16-18 years preferred; NOTE: To
optimize rapid protection [eg, for students starting college in less than 6 months], a 3-dose
series [0, 1-2, 6 months] may be administered) not at increased risk for meningococcal
disease: Based on shared clinical decision-making.
Bexsero or Trumenba (use same brand for all doses): 2-dose series at least 6 months
apart (if dose 2 is administered earlier than 6 months, administer dose 3 at least 4
months after dose 2)
MenB vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenACWY vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
Special situations for MenB:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease), persistent
complement component deficiency, complement inhibitor (eg, eculizumab,
ravulizumab) use, or microbiologists routinely exposed to Neisseria meningitidis.
Bexsero or Trumenba (use same brand for all doses including booster doses): 3-dose
primary series at 0, 1-2, 6 months (if dose 2 was administered at least 6 months after
dose 1, dose 3 not needed; if dose 3 is administered earlier than 4 months after dose 2, a
4th dose should be administered at least 4 months after dose 3).
Booster doses: 1 booster dose 1 year after primary series and every 2-3 years if risk
remains.
Pregnancy: Delay MenB until after pregnancy due to lack of safety data in pregnant persons.
May administer if at increased risk and vaccination benefits outweigh potential risks.
For MenB recommendations in outbreak setting (eg, in community or organizational
settings and among MSM) and additional meningococcal vaccination information refer to
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/rr/rr6909a1.htm.
MenB vaccines may be administered simultaneously with MenACWY vaccines if indicated, but
at a different anatomic site, if feasible.
Adults may receive a single dose of Penbraya (MenACWY-TT/MenB-FHbp) as an alternative to
separate administration of MenACWY and MenB when both vaccines would be given on the
same clinic day. For adults not at increased risk, if Penbraya is used for dose 1 MenB, then
MenB-FHbp (Trumenba) should be administered for dose 2 MenB. For adults at increased
risk of meningococcal disease, Penbraya may be used for additional MenACWY and MenB

-- 59 of 81 --

doses (including booster doses) if both would be given on the same clinic day and at least 6
months have elapsed since most recent Penbraya dose.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to meningococcal ACWY (MenACWY) [MenACWY-CRM
(Menveo); MenACWY-D (Menactra); MenACWY-TT (MenQuadfi)], refer to MenACWY Appendix.
For contraindications and precautions to meningococcal B (MenB) [MenB-4C (Bexsero);
MenB-FHbp (Trumenba)], refer to MenB Appendix.
¥¥ Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccination
Special situations:
Anatomical or functional asplenia (including sickle cell disease): 1 dose if previously did
not receive Hib vaccine.
Elective splenectomy: 1 dose preferably at least 14 days before splenectomy.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT): 3-dose series 4 weeks apart starting 6-12
months after successful transplant, regardless of Hib vaccination history.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccination,
refer to Hib Appendix.
‡‡ Mpox vaccination
Special situations:
Any person at risk for mpox infection: Complete 2-dose series, 28 days apart.
Risk factors for mpox infection include:
Persons who are gay or bisexual and other MSM, transgender, or nonbinary people who
in the past 6 months have had:
A new diagnosis of at least 1 sexually transmitted disease.
More than 1 sex partner.
Sex at a commercial sex venue.
Sex in association with a large public event in a geographic area where mpox
transmission is occurring.
Persons who are sexual partners of the persons described above.
Persons who anticipate experiencing any of the situations described above.
Pregnancy: There is currently no ACIP recommendation for Jynneos use in pregnancy due to
lack of safety data in pregnant persons. Pregnant persons with any risk factor described
above may receive Jynneos.
Health care personnel: Vaccination to protect against occupational risk in health care
settings is not routinely recommended.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to mpox, refer to Mpox Appendix.
†† Poliovirus vaccination
Routine vaccination:
Adults known or suspected to be unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated: Administer
remaining doses (1, 2, or 3 inactivated poliovirus [IPV] doses) to complete a 3-dose primary
series (NOTE: Complete primary series consists of at least 3 doses of IPV or trivalent oral
poliovirus vaccine [tOPV] in any combination). Unless there are specific reasons to believe
they were not vaccinated, most adults who were born and raised in the United States can
assume they were vaccinated against polio as children.
Special situations:
Adults at increased risk of exposure to poliovirus who completed primary series (NOTE:
Complete primary series consists of at least 3 doses of IPV or tOPV in any combination): May
administer one lifetime IPV booster.

-- 60 of 81 --

For detailed information, refer to
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/polio/hcp/recommendations.html.
Contraindications and precautions:
For contraindications and precautions to Poliovirus vaccine, IPV, refer to Poliovirus Appendix.
*** Vaccinate after pregnancy, if indicated.
Reproduced from: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Adult Immunization Schedule by Medical Condition and
Other Indication, Recommendations for Ages 19 Years or Older, United States, 2025. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/imz-schedules/adult-medical-condition.html (Accessed on December
10, 2024).
Graphic 62130 Version 27.0

-- 61 of 81 --

Table 6: Indications for pneumococcal vaccination in adults in the United States
All adults ≥50 years of age
Adults 19 to 49 years of age with any of the following:
Predisposing medical conditions:
Alcohol use disorder
Chronic heart disease
Chronic lung disease
Chronic liver disease
Diabetes mellitus
Sickle cell disease or other hemoglobinopathies
Current cigarette smoking
Increased risk of meningitis:
Cerebrospinal fluid leak
Cochlear implant
Immunocompromising conditions and other conditions associated with altered
immunocompetence :
Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency
Generalized active malignancy
HIV infection
Iatrogenic immunosuppression
Hodgkin disease
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Solid organ transplant
Chronic kidney disease and nephrotic syndrome
Functional or anatomic asplenia
History of invasive pneumococcal disease
Pneumococcal vaccination is indicated for adults with risk factors for acquisition of or severe adverse
outcomes from pneumococcal disease. These adults should receive PCV21 alone, PCV20 alone, or
PCV15 followed by PPSV23. When administering the PCV15 and PPSV23 combination, PCV15 should be
given first when possible. The recommended intervals between the 2 vaccines vary based on sequence
and indication. Refer to the UpToDate topic on pneumococcal vaccination in adults for additional detail.
ACIP: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; PCV15: 15-
valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV20: 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PCV21: 21-
valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPSV23: 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine.
* Including congestive heart failure and cardiomyopathies, excluding hypertension.
¶ Including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema, and asthma.
Δ Some UpToDate authors differ from ACIP guidance on vaccine selection for immunocompromised
individuals. Refer to the UpToDate topic on pneumococcal vaccination in adults for additional
*
¶
Δ
◊
§
¥
‡
†

-- 62 of 81 --

information.
◊ Includes B (humoral) or T lymphocyte deficiency, complement deficiencies (particularly C1, C2, C3,
and C4 deficiencies), and phagocytic disorders (excluding chronic granulomatous disease).
§ HIV infection is an indication for pneumococcal vaccination, regardless of CD4 cell count.
¥ Treatment with any immunosuppressive drugs (including long-term glucocorticoids, tumor necrosis
factor alpha inhibitors, cancer chemotherapy, and other cytokine inhibitors) or radiation therapy.
‡ Chronic kidney disease is defined as glomerular filtration rate <60 mL/min/1.73 m for ≥3 months.
† The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ACIP does not mention individuals with
a prior history of invasive pneumococcal disease in their recommendations on pneumococcal
vaccinations. We suggest pneumococcal vaccination in this population due to their increased risk for
recurrent pneumococcal disease. Refer to the UpToDate topic on pneumococcal vaccination in adults
for additional detail.
References:
1. Kobayashi M, Pilishvili T, Farrar JL, et al. Pneumococcal vaccine for adults aged ≥19 years: Recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2023; 72:1.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Newsroom: CDC Recommends Lowering the Age for Pneumococcal
Vaccination from 65 to 50 Years Old. https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2024/s1023-pneumococcal-vaccination.html
(Accessed January 15, 2026).
Graphic 86782 Version 38.0
2

-- 63 of 81 --

Table 7: Target groups for hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccination in the United
States
Patient groups 	Comments
Infants (birth to 1 year) 	The vaccination series should be started as soon as
possible after birth, preferably within 12 hours.*
For infants born to mothers who are HBsAg positive, HBIG
should be administered at the same time as the birth dose
HBV vaccine (at a different anatomic site).
For infants born to mothers who are HBsAg positive and
mothers whose HBsAg status cannot be determined,
obtain HBsAg and anti-HBs after completion of HBV
vaccination series (usually at age 9 to 12 months).
Revaccination may be necessary.
Unvaccinated persons age 1 to 60
years, regardless of risk for HBV
infection
Catch-up immunization is recommended for persons age
<60 years who were not vaccinated for HBV or whose HBV
vaccination status is unknown.
Unvaccinated persons age ≥60 years
who are at increased risk for
acquiring HBV or developing severe
HBV infection as well as those who
wish to be vaccinated
This includes individuals with:
Chronic liver disease
HIV infection
HCV infection
Percutaneous or mucosal risk for
HBV exposure (eg, injection drug
use, occupational risk, household
contact of someone with HBsAg)
Sexual risk for HBV (eg, sexual
contact with someone who is
HBsAg positive, persons who are
sexually active and not in mutually
monogamous relationships)
Planned travel to countries with
high (≥8%) or intermediate (2 to
7%) endemic prevalence of HBV
infection
Risk due to being incarcerated
Risk due to working or living in
facilities for persons who are
developmentally disabled
Persons who are predialysis or are
undergoing hemodialysis,
Among individuals who are at increased risk for HBV, post-
vaccination serologic testing (anti-HBs) is warranted for
certain groups (eg, those with HIV, health care and public
safety personnel, persons who are predialysis or are
undergoing dialysis, and sexual partners of persons who
are HBsAg positive).

-- 64 of 81 --

peritoneal dialysis, or home
dialysis
This table lists target groups for HBV vaccination. More detailed information about groups at increased
risk for HBV are presented in UpToDate content that discusses HBV epidemiology, screening, and
immunization. For persons who are immunocompromised in all target groups, post-vaccination
serology (anti-HBs) is recommended. Revaccination may be necessary. Refer to UpToDate content on
HBV vaccination for details.
HBV: hepatitis B virus; HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen; HBIG: hepatitis B immune globulin; anti-HBs:
antibody to HBsAg; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; HCV: hepatitis C virus.
* Infants born to mothers who are HBsAg-positive and mothers whose HBsAg status cannot be
determined should receive the first dose of HBV and HBIG as soon as possible after birth.
References:
1. Abara WE, Qaseem A, Schillie S, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination, screening, and linkage to care: Best practice advice from
the American College of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med 2017; 167:794.
2. Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: Recommendations of
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018; 67:1.
3. Terrault NA, Lok AS, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment and of chronic hepatitis B:
AASLD 2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology 2018; 67:1560.
4. United States Preventive Services Task Force, Krist AH, Davidson KW, et al. Screening for hepatitis B virus infection in
adolescents and adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. JAMA 2020; 324:2415.
5. Weng, MK, Doshani M, Khan MA, et al. Universal hepatitis B vaccination in adults aged 19-59 years: Updated
recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices – United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2022; 71:477.
6. Conners EE, Panagiotakopoulos L, Hofmeister MG, et al. Screening and testing for hepatitis B virus infection: CDC
recommendations – United States, 2023. MMWR Recomm Rep 2023; 72:1.
Graphic 116656 Version 11.0

-- 65 of 81 --

Table 8: Moderate to severe immunocompromising conditions that may result in
suboptimal COVID-19 vaccine response
Active treatment for solid tumor and hematologic malignancies
Hematologic malignancies associated with poor responses to COVID-19 vaccines regardless of current
treatment status (eg, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, acute
leukemia)
Receipt of solid-organ transplant or an islet transplant and taking immunosuppressive therapy
Receipt of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy or hematopoietic cell transplant (HCT) (within 2
years of transplantation or taking immunosuppressive therapy)
Moderate or severe primary immunodeficiency (eg, common variable immunodeficiency disease, severe
combined immunodeficiency, DiGeorge syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome)
Advanced HIV infection (HIV and CD4 cell counts less than 200/microL, history of an AIDS-defining illness
without immune reconstitution, or clinical manifestations of symptomatic HIV) or untreated HIV
infection
Active treatment with:
High-dose corticosteroids (ie, ≥20 mg prednisone or equivalent per day for ≥2 weeks)
Alkylating agents
Antimetabolites
Transplant-related immunosuppressive drugs
Cancer chemotherapeutic agents classified as severely immunosuppressive
TNF blockers
Other biologic agents that are immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory (eg, B cell-depleting
agents)
In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists the above conditions as
examples of immunocompromising conditions that warrant additional COVID-19 vaccine doses. This
list is not exhaustive; other immunocompromising conditions, such as impaired splenic function, may
also warrant the same vaccine adjustments. Refer to other UpToDate content for specifics of vaccine
doses and intervals.
ACIP: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; CAR: chimeric antigen receptor; TNF: tumor
necrosis factor.
* For those who received COVID-19 vaccination prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplant or CAR-T
cell therapy, repeat vaccination is recommended at least 3 months after the transplant or therapy.
Reference:
1. COVID-19 Vaccination Guidance for People Who Are Immunocompromised. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/covid/hcp/vaccine-
considerations/immunocompromised.html#cdc_cg_special_populations_section_3-description-of-moderate-and-severe-
immunocompromising-conditions-and-treatment (Accessed on August 25, 2025).
Graphic 132490 Version 10.0
*

-- 66 of 81 --

Table 9: Health care considerations for sex workers
Clinical considerations 	Comments
Cancer screening 	Routine screening is performed for all cancers including those
related to HPV (eg, cervical cancer screening).
Contraception 	Provide information about contraception as indicated; the choice of
contraceptive method is highly individualized and should be tailored
to the individual's needs.
Documentation 	In settings where sex work is legal, a health check certificate may be
requested by the patient.
In settings where sex work is illegal, documentation of sex work may
warrant special consideration.
HIV PEP and PrEP 	Discuss PEP if a patient has a known or presumed exposure to HIV
within the last 72 hours.
Discuss PrEP if the patient has ongoing risks of HIV exposure.
Immunizations 	Review immunization history. In particular, ensure appropriate
vaccination for :
HAV
HBV
HPV
STIs 	STI screening:
Chlamydia
Gonorrhea
Syphilis
Trichomonas (for those with a vagina)
HIV
HCV
HBV (vaccinate if not immune)
The frequency of such screening depends on the assessed risk of
exposure .
Routine screening for herpes and/or genital warts is not performed
(these are clinical diagnoses).
STI prevention:
Encourage male condom use .
Discuss PEP with doxycycline for selected individuals .
*
¶
Δ
◊

-- 67 of 81 --

Trauma, substance use, and
mental health
Regular screening for interpersonal violence, other trauma, and sex
trafficking.
Increased frequency of screening for substance use and mental
health issues.
Increased awareness of stigma encountered in medical care settings
(especially in settings where sex work is criminalized).
Sex workers, a term used to describe individuals who engage in sexual activity in exchange for money,
material goods, or other services, are often not identified in the health care setting. However, such
individuals may have specific healthcare needs; some of these considerations are included in this table.
HAV: hepatitis A virus; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HCV: hepatitis C virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency
virus; HPV: human papillomavirus; PEP: postexposure prophylaxis; PrEP: pre-exposure prophylaxis;
STIs: sexually transmitted infections.
* Other immunizations (eg, mpox vaccine) may be warranted in selected populations. Refer to related
UpToDate content.
¶ In some locations where safer sex practices are commonplace among sex workers (through sex
worker advocacy, peer-based education, support, and outreach services), rates of STIs among sex
workers are similar to that of the general population. In such settings, annual screening may be
reasonable. More frequent testing may be warranted in selected individuals (eg, individual
prefers/requests more frequent testing, condom breaks, residing in a country with no/little safe sex
practices among sex workers or where the legal status of sex work results in a lower likelihood of
medical care).
Δ Condoms lubricated with spermicides are no more effective than other lubricated condoms in
protecting against the transmission of HIV and other STIs.
◊ PEP with doxycycline can reduce the incidence of syphilis and chlamydia in selected populations.
Refer to related UpToDate content.
Prepared with information from:
1. Sex workers. Australian STI Management Guidelines for Use in Primary Care. https://sti.guidelines.org.au/populations-
and-situations/sex-workers/ (Accessed on February 13, 2025).
2. Recommendations for evaluating donor eligibility using individual risk-based questions to reduce the risk of human
immunodeficiency virus transmission by blood and blood products. US Food and Drug Administration.
https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/recommendations-evaluating-donor-
eligibility-using-individual-risk-based-questions-reduce-risk-human (Accessed on February 13, 2025).
3. McCann J, Crawford G, Hallett J. Sex Worker Health Outcomes in High-Income Countries of Varied Regulatory
Environments: A Systematic Review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021; 18:3956.
4. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Improving awareness of and screening for health risks among sex
workers. Committee Opinion No. 708. Obstet Gynecol 2017; 130:e53.
The editors of UpToDate would like to thank Jennefer Russo, MD, for her assistance in creating this table.
Graphic 147730 Version 2.0

-- 68 of 81 --

Table 10: Sexually transmitted infection screening recommendations by sex
assigned at birth and population
Sex
assigned
at birth
Population
Routine
screening
recommendation
Screening
frequency
Additional screening
recommendations and
comments
Cisgender
females
Age <25
years and
sexually
active
Genital chlamydia 	Annually 	If at increased risk ,
additionally screen for:
Syphilis
Trichomoniasis
Genital gonorrhea 	Annually
HIV 	At least once
HBV 	At least once
(if age ≥18
years and
immunity not
already
documented)
HCV 	At least once
(if age ≥18
years)
Age ≥25
years
HIV 	At least once 	If at increased risk ,
additionally screen for:
Genital chlamydia and
gonorrhea
Syphilis
Trichomoniasis
HBV 	At least once
(if immunity
not already
documented)
HCV 	At least once
Pregnant 	Genital chlamydia 	First trimester
(if <25 years
or at
increased
risk )
Repeat screening for these
infections in third trimester if at
increased risk.
Additional screening at first
prenatal visit:
HCV for those at risk (or if
≥18 years with no prior
screening)
Trichomoniasis for those
with HIV
Genital gonorrhea 	First trimester
(if <25 years
or at
increased
risk )
Syphilis 	First trimester,
third
trimester, and
at birth
HIV 	First trimester
HBV 	First trimester
* 	¶
*
Δ
◊
¶
*
Δ
◊
*
¶
◊
*
¶

-- 69 of 81 --

With HIV
infection
Genital chlamydia 	Annually
Genital gonorrhea 	Annually
Genital
trichomoniasis
Annually
Syphilis 	Annually
HBV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
HCV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
WSW and
WSWM
WSW and WSWM
should not be
assumed to be at
lower risk for STIs on
the basis of their
sexual orientation.
Screening for
cervical cancer and
STIs should be
conducted according
to guidelines for
women, based on an
open discussion of
sexual and
behavioral risk
factors.
Cisgender
males
MSW only
without HIV
infection
HIV 	At least once 	If at increased risk ,
additionally screen for:
Genital chlamydia and
gonorrhea
Syphilis
Targeted screening venues for
chlamydia include adolescent
clinics, STI clinics, and
correctional facilities.
HBV 	At least once
(if age ≥18
years and
immunity not
already
documented)
HCV 	At least once
(if age ≥18
years)
MSM without
HIV infection
Genital chlamydia 	At least
annually
More frequent screening (every
3 to 6 months) for chlamydia,
gonorrhea, and syphilis is
recommended in those with
risk factors, including those
using PrEP or doxy PEP. More
frequent screening for HIV,
Rectal chlamydia (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Genital gonorrhea 	At least
annually
*
*
◊
§
Δ
◊

-- 70 of 81 --

HBV, and HCV may also be
warranted.
Rectal gonorrhea (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Pharyngeal
gonorrhea (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Syphilis 	At least
annually
HIV 	At least
annually
HAV 	At least once
HBV 	At least once
HCV 	At least once
MSW only
with HIV
infection
Genital chlamydia 	Annually
Genital gonorrhea 	Annually
Syphilis 	Annually
HBV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
HCV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
MSM with
HIV infection
Genital chlamydia 	At least
annually
More frequent screening (every
3 to 6 months) for chlamydia,
gonorrhea, and syphilis is
recommended in those with
risk factors, including those
using doxy PEP. More frequent
screening for HBV and HCV
may also be warranted.
Rectal chlamydia (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Genital gonorrhea 	At least
annually
Rectal gonorrhea (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Pharyngeal
gonorrhea (if
exposed)
At least
annually
Syphilis 	At least
annually
HAV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
HBV 	At least once
(eg, at first
visit)
¥
◊
◊
¥

-- 71 of 81 --

HCV 	At least
annually
Transgender and gender-
diverse individuals
Screening for STIs should be based on an individual's anatomy:
Transgender men and gender-diverse individuals with a cervix
should be screened for genital gonorrhea, chlamydia, and cervical
cancer according to recommendations for cisgender women.
Transgender women and gender-diverse individuals assigned male
at birth should be screened for genital gonorrhea and chlamydia
according to recommendations for cisgender men.
Screening for other STIs should be based on sexual practice, risk factors,
and exposures.
doxy PEP: doxycycline postexposure prophylaxis; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HCV:
hepatitis C virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MSM: men who have sex with men; MSW: men
who have sex only with women; PrEP: pre-exposure prophylaxis; STI: sexually transmitted infection;
WSW: women who have sex with women; WSWM: women who have sex with women and men.
* Screening for nongenital infections in females (eg, rectal chlamydial infection, pharyngeal and rectal
gonococcal infection) can be considered based on reported sexual behaviors and exposure, via shared
clinical decision-making between the patient and the provider.
¶ Factors conferring increased risk for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomoniasis in females include
transactional sex, new sex partner, multiple sex partners, a sex partner with concurrent partners, or a
sex partner with an STI. Risk factors for syphilis include residence in high-prevalence areas, history of
incarceration, or transactional sex work. STI screening may also be considered in high-prevalence
settings (eg, STI clinic or correctional facility).
Δ For all adults 18 years of age or older, regardless of risk factors, at least 1-time screening for HBV
infection is recommended, unless they have documented vaccine receipt and serologic evidence of
vaccine response. Those who are susceptible should be vaccinated. For those who have risk factors for
HBV exposure, ongoing screening is warranted if they are unvaccinated or have nonresponse to
vaccination. Refer to other UpToDate content on STIs for details.
◊ All adults 18 years of age or older should be screened for HCV at least once, except in settings where
the HCV positivity is <0.1%. Repeated screening is warranted for those with ongoing risk factors (eg,
injection drug use). Increased risk factors for hepatitis C infection among MSM include HIV infection,
high community HCV prevalence and incidence, high-risk sexual behaviors, and concomitant ulcerative
STIs or STI-related proctitis. Refer to other UpToDate content on hepatitis C screening for details.
§ Factors conferring increased risk for gonorrhea and chlamydia in MSW include an infection in the
preceding 24 months. Screening for chlamydia in young males can be considered in high-prevalence
clinical settings (adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, STI/sexual health clinics). Increased risk
factors for syphilis may be based on geography, race/ethnicity, history of incarceration, transactional
sex work, or age <29 years.
¥ Increased risk factors for gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, and HIV among MSM include multiple or
anonymous partners; intravenous drug use; sex in conjunction with illicit drug use, including
methamphetamines; and sex partners who engage in these activities. MSM who have not been
vaccinated for HBV or have had nonresponse to vaccination remain at risk for HBV infection.
References:
◊

-- 72 of 81 --

1. California sexually transmitted infections (STI) screening recommendations, 2021. California Department of Public
Health. https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CID/DCDC/Pages/California-STI-Screening-Recommendations.aspx (Accessed
on January 24, 2023).
2. Workowski KA, Bachmann LH, Chan PA, et al. sexually transmitted infections treatment guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm
Rep 2021; 70:1.
3. Conners EE, Panagiotakopoulos L, Hofmeister MG, et al. Screening and testing for hepatitis B virus infection: CDC
recommendations – United States, 2023. MMWR Recomm Rep 2023; 72:1.
4. Screening for syphilis in pregnancy. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practice-advisory/articles/2024/04/screening-for-syphilis-in-pregnancy
(Accessed on November 11, 2025).
Graphic 103391 Version 15.0

-- 73 of 81 --

Table 11: Groups at increased risk for hepatitis B virus infection
Individuals at risk for HBV due to vertical transmission (ie, mother-to-child
transmission)
Individuals born in regions with high (≥8%) or intermediate (≥2%) prevalence rates for HBV,
including immigrants and adopted children
Infants born to pregnant persons who are HBsAg positive
US-born persons not vaccinated as infants whose parents were born in regions with high HBV
endemicity (≥8%)
Individuals at risk due to horizontal transmission (ie, percutaneous or mucosal
exposure to blood or body fluids contaminated with blood)
Household contacts of HBsAg-positive persons
Needle sharing or sexual contacts of HBsAg-positive persons
Individuals who have ever injected drugs
Individuals with multiple sexual partners and/or history of sexually transmitted infections
Men who have sex with men
Inmates of correctional facilities or other detention settings
Individuals with HIV infection
Individuals with current or past HCV infection
Individuals with end-stage kidney disease on maintenance renal dialysis
Other individuals
Individuals with elevated alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase levels of
unknown etiology
Individuals who request HBV testing
In the United States, screening for HBV includes :
Risk-based screening – For all individuals (including children and adolescents), screen those who
have any of the risk factors listed in the table if they might have been susceptible during the
period of increased risk . For those with ongoing risk factors (ie, for horizontal transmission) who
remain susceptible, continue to test periodically.
Universal screening – For individuals ≥18 years of age, screen at least once in a lifetime.
However, for those without risk factors for HBV, screening is generally not needed if there is
documentation of completing a hepatitis B vaccine series and evidence of immunity (anti-HBs
≥10 milli-international units/mL) after vaccination.
Pregnancy screening – Screen all pregnant people during each pregnancy, regardless of
vaccination status of history of prior testing.
Refer to UpToDate content on screening and diagnosis of HBV, HBV immunization, and HBV and
pregnancy for more detailed information on screening and vaccination.
anti-HBc: hepatitis B core antibodies; anti-HBs: hepatitis B surface antibody; HBIG: hepatitis B immune
globulin; HBsAg: hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HCV: hepatitis C virus; HIV: human
immunodeficiency virus; US: United States.
*
¶
*
Δ
◊
§
[1]
¥
Δ
‡

-- 74 of 81 --

* If HBsAg-positive persons are found in first-generation immigrants of a family, subsequent
generations should be tested.
¶ To reduce the risk of perinatal transmission, infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers should receive
HBIG and hepatitis B vaccine as soon as possible and within 12 hours of birth and then complete the
hepatitis B series. Postvaccination serology should be obtained at 9 to 12 months. Refer to the
UpToDate topic that discusses HBV immunization in infants.
Δ In unvaccinated individuals with ongoing HBV risk through percutaneous or mucosal exposure,
hepatitis B vaccine should be initiated at the time of screening; the need for subsequent doses will
depend upon the results. Postvaccination serology should be performed to ensure immunity. For at-
risk persons who do not complete the vaccine series, repeat testing should be performed periodically
(eg, every 1 to 2 years).
◊ The presence of HBV coinfection informs the choice of antiretroviral regimen. In addition, patients
with HIV who are not immune should be vaccinated regardless of age or risk factors, since HBV
infection has an accelerated course in coinfected patients.
§ Patients with chronic HBV are at risk for HBV reactivation with direct-acting antiviral therapy for
hepatitis C. Refer to the UpToDate topic that provides an overview of the management of hepatitis C
infection.
¥ Susceptible persons include those who have never been infected with HBV (ie, HBsAg-negative, total
anti-HBc-negative, and anti-HBs-negative) and either did not complete a hepatitis B vaccine series per
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommendations or who are known to be vaccine
nonresponders.
‡ For most patients who remain without risk factors for acquiring HBV, repeat screening is not
warranted. However, screening prior to blood, plasma, organ, tissue, or semen donation is routinely
performed, regardless of the person's prior history. In addition, screening is warranted prior to
initiating immunosuppressive therapy (eg, corticosteroids, biologics, cancer chemotherapy,
antirejection therapies) since persons with HBV are at risk for HBV reactivation. Refer to the UpToDate
topic on HBV reactivation.
Reference:
1. Conners EE, Panagiotakopoulos L, Hofmeister MG, et al. Screening and testing for hepatitis B virus infection: CDC
recommendations – United States, 2023. MMWR Recomm Rep 2023; 72:1.
With additional information from:
Weinbaum CM, Williams I, Mast EE, et al. Recommendations for identification and public health management of persons
with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. MMWR Recomm Rep 2008; 57:1.
Abara WE, Qaseem A, Schillie S, et al. Hepatitis B vaccination, screening, and linkage to care: Best practice advice from
the American College of Physicians and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Ann Intern Med 2017; 167:794.
Terrault NA, Lok ASF, McMahon BJ, et al. Update on prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic hepatitis B: AASLD
2018 hepatitis B guidance. Hepatology 2018; 67:1560.
Graphic 55052 Version 20.0

-- 75 of 81 --

Table 12: Short Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-2)
Name: 	Date:
Over the past 2 weeks, how
often have you been bothered
by any of the following
problems?
Not at all 	Several days 	More than
half the days
Nearly every
day
Little interest or pleasure in
doing things?
0 	1 	2 	3
Feeling down, depressed, or
hopeless?
0 	1 	2 	3
Total point
score:
____ 	____ 	+ ____ 	+ ____ 	+ ____
Score interpretation :
PHQ-2 score 	Probability of major
depressive disorder (%)
Probability of any depressive
disorder (%)
1 	15.4 	36.9
2 	21.1 	48.3
3 	38.4 	75.0
4 	45.5 	81.2
5 	56.4 	84.6
6 	78.6 	92.9
Reference:
1. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire-2: validity of a two-item depression screener. Med
Care 2003; 41:1284.
PHQ-2 reproduced with the permission of Pfizer Inc.
Graphic 89663 Version 3.0
[1]

-- 76 of 81 --

Table 13: PHQ-9 depression questionnaire
Name: 	Date:
Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been
bothered by any of the following problems?
Not at
all
Several
days
More
than
half
the
days
Nearly
every
day
Little interest or pleasure in doing things 	0 	1 	2 	3
Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless 	0 	1 	2 	3
Trouble falling or staying asleep or sleeping too much 0 	1 	2 	3
Feeling tired or having little energy 	0 	1 	2 	3
Poor appetite or overeating 	0 	1 	2 	3
Feeling bad about yourself, that you are a failure, or
that you have let yourself or your family down
0 	1 	2 	3
Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the
newspaper or watching television
0 	1 	2 	3
Moving or speaking so slowly that other people could
have noticed; or the opposite, being so fidgety or
restless that you have been moving around a lot more
than usual
0 	1 	2 	3
Thoughts that you would be better off dead or of
hurting yourself in some way
0 	1 	2 	3
Total ___ = 	___ 	+ ___ 	+ ___ 	+ ___
PHQ-9 score ≥10: Likely major depression
Depression score ranges:
5 to 9: mild
10 to 14: moderate
15 to 19: moderately severe
≥20: severe
If you checked off any problems, how difficult
have these problems made it for you to do your
work, take care of things at home, or get along
with other people?
Not
difficult
at all
___
Somewhat
difficult
___
Very
difficult
___
Extremely
difficult
___
PHQ: Patient Health Questionnaire.
Developed by Drs. Robert L Spitzer, Janet BW Williams, Kurt Kroenke, and colleagues, with an educational grant from Pfizer, Inc.

-- 77 of 81 --

No permission required to reproduce, translate, display or distribute.
Graphic 59307 Version 13.0

-- 78 of 81 --

Table 14: AUDIT-C
Question #1: How often did you have a drink containing alcohol in the past year?
• Never 	(0 points)
• Monthly or less 	(1 point)
• 2 to 4 times a month 	(2 points)
• 2 to 3 times per week 	(3 points)
• 4 or more times a week 	(4 points)
Question #2: How many drinks did you have on a typical day when you were drinking
in the past year?
• 1 or 2 	(0 points)
• 3 or 4 	(1 point)
• 5 or 6 	(2 points)
• 7 to 9 	(3 points)
• 10 or more 	(4 points)
Question #3: How often did you have 6 or more drinks on one occasion in the past
year?
• Never 	(0 points)
• Less than monthly 	(1 point)
• Monthly 	(2 points)
• Weekly 	(3 points)
• Daily or almost daily 	(4 points)
The AUDIT-C is scored on a scale of 0 to 12 (scores of 0 reflect no alcohol use). In men, a score of 4 or
more is considered positive; in women, a score of 3 or more is considered positive.
Graphic 53246 Version 5.0

-- 79 of 81 --

Table 15: Clinical risk factors for fracture
Advanced age (eg, ≥65 years for women)
Previous fracture during adulthood
High fall risk
Impaired mobility
Chronic glucocorticoid therapy (eg, ≥3 months)
Parental history of hip fracture
Low body weight (<58 kg [127 lb])
Current cigarette smoking
Excess alcohol intake
Height loss (>3.8 cm [1.5 in]) and/or kyphosis
Secondary osteoporosis (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, hyperthyroidism, primary hyperparathyroidism,
hypogonadal states, gastrointestinal diseases and malabsorptive states)
BMD: bone mineral density.
* Most UpToDate contributors do not routinely measure BMD in men based on age alone. Instead,
they perform targeted testing in men aged ≥50 years with ≥1 clinical risk factor for fracture. However,
some experts suggest measuring BMD in men aged ≥70 years, irrespective of other clinical risk
factors.
Reference:
1. Kanis JA, Borgstrom F, De Laet C, et al. Assessment of fracture risk. Osteoporos Int 2005; 16:581.
Graphic 76445 Version 5.0
*

-- 80 of 81 --

Contributor Disclosures
Anthony J Viera, MD, MPH No relevant financial relationship(s) with ineligible companies to
disclose. Joann G Elmore, MD, MPH Other Financial Interest: Elsevier [Author royalties]. All of the
relevant financial relationships listed have been mitigated. Sara Swenson, MD No relevant financial
relationship(s) with ineligible companies to disclose.
Contributor disclosures are reviewed for conflicts of interest by the editorial group. When found, these
are addressed by vetting through a multi-level review process, and through requirements for references
to be provided to support the content. Appropriately referenced content is required of all authors and
must conform to UpToDate standards of evidence.
Conflict of interest policy


-- 81 of 81 --

